1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 Oct 4;12:960938. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2022.960938. eCollection 2022.

Development of a high-sensitivity and short-duration fluorescence in situ 
hybridization method for viral mRNA detection in HEK 293T cells.

Hu D(1), Wang T(2)(3), Uddin J(4), Greene WK(5), Hu D(6), Ma B(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinical College, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China.
(2)Telethon Kids Institute, Perth Children's Hospital, Nedlands, WA, Australia.
(3)Medical School, University of Western Australia, Nedlands, WA, Australia.
(4)School of Veterinary Medicine, Murdoch University, Murdoch, WA, Australia.
(5)Medical, Molecular and Forensic Sciences, Murdoch University, Murdoch, WA, 
Australia.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Taizhou Municipal Hospital, Taizhou, 
China.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an extremely contagious illness caused by 
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Early disease 
recognition of COVID-19 is crucial not only for prompt diagnosis and treatment 
of the patients, but also for effective public health surveillance and response. 
The reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) is the most common 
method for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 viral mRNA and is regarded as the gold 
standard test for COVID-19. However, this test and those for antibodies (IgM and 
IgG) and antigens have certain limitations (e.g., by yielding false-negative and 
false-positive results). We have developed an RNA fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) method for high-sensitivity detection of SARS-CoV-2 mRNAs 
in HEK 293T cell cultures as a model. After transfection of HEK 293T cells with 
plasmids, Spike (S)/envelope (E) proteins and their mRNAs were clearly detected 
inside the cells. In addition, hybridization time could be reduced to 2 hours 
for faster detection when probe concentration was increased. Our approach might 
thus significantly improve the sensitivity and specificity of SARS-CoV-2 
detection and be widely applied for the high-sensitivity single-molecular 
detection of other RNA viruses (e.g., Middle East respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus (MERS-CoV), Hepatitis A virus, all influenza viruses, and human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)) in various types of samples including tissue, body 
fluid, blood, and water. RNA FISH can also be utilized for the detection of DNA 
viruses (e.g., Monkeypox virus, human papillomavirus (HPV), and cytomegalovirus 
(CMV)) by detection of their mRNAs inside cells or body fluid.

Copyright Â© 2022 Hu, Wang, Uddin, Greene, Hu and Ma.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.960938
PMCID: PMC9577401
PMID: 36268226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.