1. Plant Physiol. 2023 Jan 2;191(1):400-413. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiac488.

Rice GLUCAN SYNTHASE-LIKE5 promotes anther callose deposition to maintain 
meiosis initiation and progression.

Somashekar H(1)(2), Mimura M(1), Tsuda K(1)(2), Nonomura KI(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Plant Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Gene Function and Phenomics, 
National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.
(2)Department of Genetics, School of Life Science, The Graduate University of 
Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.

Callose is a plant cell wall polysaccharide whose deposition is spatiotemporally 
regulated in various developmental processes and environmental stress responses. 
The appearance of callose in premeiotic anthers is a prominent histological 
hallmark for the onset of meiosis in flowering plants; however, the biological 
role of callose in meiosis remains unknown. Here, we show that rice (Oryza 
sativa) GLUCAN SYNTHASE LIKE5 (OsGSL5), a callose synthase, localizes on the 
plasma membrane of pollen mother cells (PMCs) and is responsible for biogenesis 
of callose in anther locules through premeiotic and meiotic stages. In Osgsl5 
mutant anthers mostly lacking callose deposition, aberrant PMCs accompanied by 
aggregated, unpaired, or multivalent chromosomes were frequently observed and, 
furthermore, a considerable number of mutant PMCs had untimely progress into 
meiosis compared to that of wild-type PMCs. Immunostaining of meiosis-specific 
protein HOMOLOGOUS PAIRING ABERRATION IN RICE MEIOSIS2 in premeiotic PMCs 
revealed precocious meiosis entry in Osgsl5 anthers. These findings provide 
insights into the function of callose in controlling the timing of male meiosis 
initiation and progression, in addition to roles in microsporogenesis, in 
flowering plants.

Â© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Society of Plant Biologists.

DOI: 10.1093/plphys/kiac488
PMCID: PMC9806566
PMID: 36271865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]