1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2022 Oct 21;101(42):e31255. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000031255.

Comparison of incidence and prognosis between young and old gastric cancer 
patient in North-Western China: A retrospective cohort study.

An J(1), Ma X(2), Zhang C(2), Zhou W(2), Wang C(2), Miao W(2), Cai B(2), Yu 
P(2), Qiao W(2), Xu Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Basic Medical Department, Medical College of Qinghai University, Xining, 
China.
(2)Department of Gastrointestinal Tumor Surgery, the Affiliated Hospital of 
Qinghai University, Xining, China.

Gastric cancer (GC) is the fourth most common cancer in the world and the second 
most common cancer in China. In this study, we compared the clinicopathological 
features and prognosis of GC between young and old patients after curative 
resection. Six hundred and eighty-six patients with GC resected were divided two 
groups according to patient age: Younger GC patients ≤40 years of age (YGC, 
n = 52) and older GC patients >40 years of age (OGC, n = 634). The YGC group had 
52 (7.6%) patients in total 686 GC patients. YGC patients was predominant in 
women (53.8% vs 26.5%) compared with OGC patients. 5-year overall survival 
exhibited differences in tumor sites, tumor sizes, macroscopic types, T staging, 
N staging, rate of N staging (rN), tumor node metastasis staging, scope of 
gastrectomy, radical degree, and lymphatic vascular invasion within each of YGC 
and OGC group. Univariate analysis of the clinical factors affecting overall 
survival in YGC group revealed the significant differences in tumor size, 
macroscopic types (except Borrmann), T staging (except T2), N staging (N3a and 
N3b), rN, tumor node metastasis staging (III), scope of gastrectomy, radical 
degree, and lymphatic vascular invasion. Gender, N staging, rN, radical degrees 
were the independent prognostic factors of younger patients with GC. Similar 
results were found in the OGC groups. The significant differences in radical 
degree and lymphatic vascular invasion were found between male and female 
patients in YGC group. Similar results were found in the OGC groups. Our results 
showed that YGC patients differ from OGC patients in predominance of women. 
Gender, N staging, rN, radical degrees were independent risk factors for the 
prognosis in YGC patients.

Copyright © 2022 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000031255
PMCID: PMC9592325
PMID: 36281163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.