1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Oct 1;13(10):1774. doi: 10.3390/genes13101774.

A Novel Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism in WNT4 Promoter Affects Its 
Transcription and Response to FSH in Chicken Follicles.

Zhong C(1), Wang Y(2), Liu C(3), Jiang Y(1), Kang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology and Disease 
Control and Prevention, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, 
Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an 271018, China.
(2)College of Life Science, Qilu Normal University, Jinan 250200, China.
(3)Qishan Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Station, Zhaoyuan 265413, China.

The signaling pathway of the wingless-type mouse mammary tumor virus integration 
site (Wnt) plays an important role in ovarian and follicular development. In our 
previous study, WNT4 was shown to be involved in the selection and development 
of chicken follicles by upregulating the expression of follicle-stimulating 
hormone receptors (FSHR), stimulating the proliferation of follicular granulosa 
cells, and increasing the secretion of steroidal hormones. FSH also stimulates 
the expression of WNT4. To further explore the molecular mechanism by which FSH 
upregulates WNT4 and characterize the cis-elements regulating WNT4 
transcription, in this study, we determined the critical regulatory regions 
affecting chicken WNT4 transcription. We then identified a single-nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) in this region, and finally analyzed the associations of the 
SNP with chicken production traits. The results showed that the 5′ regulatory 
region from −3354 to −2689 of WNT4 had the strongest activity and greatest 
response to FSH stimulation, and we identified one SNP site in this segment, 
−3015 (G > C), as affecting the binding of NFAT5 (nuclear factor of activated T 
cells 5) and respones to FSH stimulation. When G was replaced with C at this 
site, it eliminated the NFAT5 binding. The mRNA level of WNT4 in small yellow 
follicles of chickens with genotype GG was significantly higher than that of the 
other two genotypes. Moreover, this locus was found to be significantly 
associated with comb length in hens. Individuals with the genotype CC had longer 
combs. Collectively, these data suggested that SNP−3015 (G > C) is involved in 
the regulation of WNT4 gene expression by responding FSH and affecting the 
binding of NFAT5 and that it is associated with chicken comb length. The current 
results provide a reference for further revealing the response mechanism between 
WNT and FSH.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13101774
PMCID: PMC9602048
PMID: 36292659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.