1. Microorganisms. 2022 Oct 17;10(10):2046. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms10102046.

Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus-Derived Exopolysaccharide Attenuates 
D-Galactose-Induced Oxidative Stress and Inflammatory Brain Injury and Modulates 
Gut Microbiota in a Mouse Model.

Kumari M(1)(2), Dasriya VL(1), Nataraj BH(1), Nagpal R(3), Behare PV(1).

Author information:
(1)Technofunctional Starter Lab., National Collection of Dairy Cultures (NCDC), 
Dairy Microbiology Division, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 132001, 
Haryana, India.
(2)College of Dairy and Food Technology, Agriculture University, Jodhpur 342304, 
Rajasthan, India.
(3)Department of Nutrition and Integrative Physiology, Florida State University, 
Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA.

This study aimed to investigate the protective effect of a novel 
exopolysaccharide EPSRam12, produced by Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus Ram12, 
against D-galactose-induced brain injury and gut microbiota dysbiosis in mice. 
The findings demonstrate that EPSRam12 increases the level of antioxidant 
enzymes superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione peroxidase, total 
antioxidant capacity, and the level of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, while 
decreasing malonaldehyde, nitric oxide, pro-inflammatory cytokines including 
TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, MCP-1, and the mRNA expression of cyclooxygenase-2, 
inducible nitric oxide synthase, and the activation of nuclear factor-kappa-B in 
the brain tissues of D-galactose-treated mice. Further analyses reveal that 
EPSRam12 improves gut mucosal barrier function and increases the levels of 
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) in the intestine while restoring gut microbial 
diversity by enriching the abundance of SCFA-producing microbial genera 
Prevotella, Clostridium, Intestinimonas, and Acetatifactor while decreasing 
potential pathobionts including Helicobacter. These findings of antioxidative 
and anti-inflammatory effects in the brain and ameliorative effects on 
epithelial integrity, SCFAs and microbiota in the gut, provide novel insights 
into the effect of EPSRam12 intervention on the gut-microbiome-brain axis and 
should facilitate prospective understanding of microbial exopolysaccharide for 
improved host health.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms10102046
PMCID: PMC9611687
PMID: 36296322

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.