1. Vaccines (Basel). 2022 Oct 3;10(10):1659. doi: 10.3390/vaccines10101659.

Temporal Association between Hampton's Hump Pulmonary Embolism and First-Dose 
ChAdOx1 nCov-19 Vaccine in a Patient with Activated Protein C Resistance.

Kriegshäuser G(1)(2), Braunsteiner A(3).

Author information:
(1)IHR LABOR Medical Diagnostic Laboratories, Wagramer Straße 144, 1220 Vienna, 
Austria.
(2)School of Management, University of Applied Sciences BFI, 1020 Vienna, 
Austria.
(3)Radiologicum Wieden, 1040 Vienna, Austria.

A 58-year-old man presented to his practitioner with right-sided pleuritic chest 
pain, dyspnea, and fatigue 18 days following the first dose of the ChAdOx1 
nCov-19 vaccine. Chest radiography showed a basal wedge-shaped consolidation 
indicative of a Hampton’s hump in the right lower lobe, which was confirmed by 
subsequent computed tomography pulmonary angiography. The major laboratory 
abnormalities were a markedly elevated D-dimer level of 7.53 µg/mL (normal range 
< 0.5 µg/mL), a CRP level of 62.8 mg/L (normal range < 5 mg/L), and a previously 
unknown activated protein C resistance of 1.3 (normal range ≥ 1.8). Genetic 
analysis identified the patient to be heterozygous for the FVLeiden mutation. 
Neither other errors of hemostasis nor antibodies against platelet factor 
4-polyanion complexes could be observed. Moreover, we failed to demonstrate 
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 infection. The patient fully 
recovered with no sequelae but is being continued on long-term anticoagulation 
given his risk of recurrent venous thromboembolism. Here we report on the 
temporal association between the first dose of the ChAdOx1 nCov-19 vaccine and 
extensive pulmonary embolism in an otherwise healthy patient with activated 
protein C resistance, however, further investigation is needed to prove 
causality.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines10101659
PMCID: PMC9609840
PMID: 36298523

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.