1. Front Reprod Health. 2021 Dec 17;3:793226. doi: 10.3389/frph.2021.793226. 
eCollection 2021.

Polygenic Risk Score Prediction for Endometriosis.

Kloeve-Mogensen K(1)(2), Rohde PD(1)(3), Twisttmann S(4), Nygaard M(4), Koldby 
KM(3), Steffensen R(2), Dahl CM(5), Rytter D(6), Overgaard MT(1), Forman A(7), 
Christiansen L(4)(8), Nyegaard M(3)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Immunology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, 
Denmark.
(3)Department of Health Science and Technology, Aalborg University, Aalborg, 
Denmark.
(4)The Danish Twin Registry, Department of Public Health, University of Southern 
Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(5)Department of Business and Economics, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
(6)Research Unit for Epidemiology, Department of Public Health, Aarhus 
University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(7)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby, 
Denmark.
(8)Section of Forensic Genetics, Department of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of 
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

Endometriosis is a major health care challenge because many young women with 
endometriosis go undetected for an extended period, which may lead to pain 
sensitization. Clinical tools to better identify candidates for 
laparoscopy-guided diagnosis are urgently needed. Since endometriosis has a 
strong genetic component, there is a growing interest in using genetics as part 
of the clinical risk assessment. The aim of this work was to investigate the 
discriminative ability of a polygenic risk score (PRS) for endometriosis using 
three different cohorts: surgically confirmed cases from the Western Danish 
endometriosis referral Center (249 cases, 348 controls), cases identified from 
the Danish Twin Registry (DTR) based on ICD-10 codes from the National Patient 
Registry (140 cases, 316 controls), and replication analysis in the UK Biobank 
(2,967 cases, 256,222 controls). Patients with adenomyosis from the DTR (25 
cases) and from the UK Biobank (1,883 cases) were included for comparison. The 
PRS was derived from 14 genetic variants identified in a published genome-wide 
association study with more than 17,000 cases. The PRS was associated with 
endometriosis in surgically confirmed cases [odds ratio (OR) = 1.59, p = 2.57× 
10-7] and in cases from the DTR biobank (OR = 1.50, p = 0.0001). Combining the 
two Danish cohorts, each standard deviation increase in PRS was associated with 
endometriosis (OR = 1.57, p = 2.5× 10-11), as well as the major subtypes of 
endometriosis; ovarian (OR = 1.72, p = 6.7× 10-5), infiltrating (OR = 1.66, p = 
2.7× 10-9), and peritoneal (OR = 1.51, p = 2.6 × 10-3). These findings were 
replicated in the UK Biobank with a much larger sample size (OR = 1.28, p < 2.2× 
10-16). The PRS was not associated with adenomyosis, suggesting that adenomyosis 
is not driven by the same genetic risk variants as endometriosis. Our results 
suggest that a PRS captures an increased risk of all types of endometriosis 
rather than an increased risk for endometriosis in specific locations. Although 
the discriminative accuracy is not yet sufficient as a stand-alone clinical 
utility, our data demonstrate that genetics risk variants in form of a simple 
PRS may add significant new discriminatory value. We suggest that an 
endometriosis PRS in combination with classical clinical risk factors and 
symptoms could be an important step in developing an urgently needed 
endometriosis risk stratification tool.

Copyright © 2021 Kloeve-Mogensen, Rohde, Twisttmann, Nygaard, Koldby, 
Steffensen, Dahl, Rytter, Overgaard, Forman, Christiansen and Nyegaard.

DOI: 10.3389/frph.2021.793226
PMCID: PMC9580817
PMID: 36303976

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.