1. PLoS One. 2022 Oct 31;17(10):e0275428. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0275428. 
eCollection 2022.

2-Bromopalmitate decreases spinal inflammation and attenuates 
oxaliplatin-induced neuropathic pain via reducing Drp1-mediated mitochondrial 
dysfunction.

Dong ZB(1), Wang YJ(1), Cheng ML(2), Wang BJ(2), Lu H(2), Zhu HL(2), Liu L(2), 
Xie M(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Hubei University of Science and Technology, Xianning, 
Hubei, China.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Hubei University of Science and Technology, 
Xianning, Hubei, China.

Oxaliplatin (OXA) is a third-generation platinum compound with clinical activity 
in multiple solid tumors. Due to the repetition of chemotherapy cycle, 
OXA-induced chronic neuropathy presenting as paresthesia and pain. This study 
explored the neuropathy of chemotherapy pain and investigated the analgesic 
effect of 2-bromopalmitate (2-BP) on the pain behavior of OXA-induced rats. The 
chemotherapy pain rat model was established by the five consecutive 
administration of OXA (intraperitoneal, 4 mg/kg). After the establishment of 
OXA-induced rats, the pain behavior test, inflammatory signal analysis and 
mitochondrial function measurement were conducted. OXA-induced rats exhibited 
mechanical allodynia and spinal inflammatory infiltration. Our fluorescence and 
western blot analysis revealed spinal astrocytes were activated in OXA rats with 
up-regulation of astrocytic markers. In addition, NOD-, LRR- and pyrin 
domain-containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome mediated inflammatory signal cascade 
was also activated. Inflammation was triggered by dysfunctional mitochondria 
which represented by increase in cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) level and manganese 
superoxide dismutase (Mn-SOD) activity. Intrathecally injection of 2-BP 
significantly attenuated dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) mediated mitochondrial 
fission, recovered mitochondrial function, suppressed NLRP3 inflammasome 
cascade, and consequently decreased mechanical pain sensitivity. For cell 
research, 2-BP treatment significantly reversed tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) 
induced mitochondria membrane potential deficiency and high reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) level. These findings indicate 2-BP decreases spinal inflammation 
and relieves OXA-induced neuropathic pain via reducing Drp1-mediated 
mitochondrial dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0275428
PMCID: PMC9621438
PMID: 36315519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.