1. PLoS One. 2022 Oct 31;17(10):e0272830. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0272830. 
eCollection 2022.

One health genomic surveillance and response to a university-based outbreak of 
the SARS-CoV-2 Delta AY.25 lineage, Arizona, 2021.

Yaglom HD(1), Maurer M(2), Collins B(2), Hojnacki J(2), Monroy-Nieto J(1), 
Bowers JR(1), Packard S(2), Erickson DE(1)(3)(4), Barrand ZA(1)(3)(4), Simmons 
KM(1)(3)(4), Brock BN(1)(3)(4), Lim ES(5), Smith S(6), Hepp CM(1)(3)(4), 
Engelthaler DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational Genomics Research Institute, Flagstaff, Arizona, United States 
of America.
(2)Coconino County Health and Human Services, Flagstaff, Arizona, United States 
of America.
(3)School of Informatics, Computing, and Cyber Systems, Northern Arizona 
University, Flagstaff, Arizona, United States of America.
(4)Pathogen and Microbiome Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, 
Arizona, United States of America.
(5)Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America.
(6)Campus Health Services, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona, 
United States of America.

Genomic surveillance and wastewater tracking strategies were used to strengthen 
the public health response to an outbreak of the SARS-CoV-2 Delta AY.25 lineage 
associated with a university campus in Arizona. Epidemiologic and clinical data 
routinely gathered through contact tracing were matched to SARS-CoV-2 genomes 
belonging to an outbreak of AY.25 identified through ongoing phylogenomic 
analyses. Continued phylogenetic analyses were conducted to further describe the 
AY.25 outbreak. Wastewater collected twice weekly from sites across campus was 
tested for SARS-CoV-2 by RT-qPCR, and subsequently sequenced to identify 
variants. The AY.25 outbreak was defined by a single mutation (C18804T) and 
comprised 379 genomes from SARS-CoV-2 positive cases associated with the 
university and community. Several undergraduate student gatherings and 
congregate living settings on campus likely contributed to the rapid spread of 
COVID-19 across the university with secondary transmission into the community. 
The clade defining mutation was also found in wastewater samples collected from 
around student dormitories a week before the semester began, and 9 days before 
cases were identified. Genomic, epidemiologic, and wastewater surveillance 
provided evidence that an AY.25 clone was likely imported into the university 
setting just prior to the onset of the Fall 2021 semester, rapidly spread 
through a subset of the student population, and then subsequent spillover 
occurred in the surrounding community. The university and local public health 
department worked closely together to facilitate timely reporting of cases, 
identification of close contacts, and other necessary response and mitigation 
strategies. The emergence of new SARS-CoV-2 variants and potential threat of 
other infectious disease outbreaks on university campuses presents an 
opportunity for future comprehensive One Health genomic data driven, targeted 
interventions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0272830
PMCID: PMC9621446
PMID: 36315517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.