1. Cell Death Discov. 2022 Oct 31;8(1):437. doi: 10.1038/s41420-022-01229-5.

DNAJA1- and conformational mutant p53-dependent inhibition of cancer cell 
migration by a novel compound identified through a virtual screen.

Nishikawa S(1), Kaida A(2), Parrales A(1), Ranjan A(1), Alalem M(1), Ren H(3), 
Schoenen FJ(4), Johnson DK(5), Iwakuma T(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology & Oncology, Children's Mercy 
Research Institute, Kansas City, MO, USA.
(2)Department of Dental Radiology and Radiation Oncology, Graduate School of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas 
City, KS, USA.
(4)Higuchi Biosciences Center, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, USA.
(5)Molecular Graphics and Modeling Laboratory, University of Kansas, Lawrence, 
KS, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology & Oncology, Children's Mercy 
Research Institute, Kansas City, MO, USA. tiwakuma@cmh.edu.
(7)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas 
City, KS, USA. tiwakuma@cmh.edu.

Cancers are frequently addicted to oncogenic missense mutant p53 (mutp53). 
DNAJA1, a member of heat shock protein 40 (HSP40), also known as J-domain 
proteins (JDPs), plays a crucial role in the stabilization and oncogenic 
activity of misfolded or conformational mutp53 by binding to and preventing 
mutp53 from proteasomal degradation. However, strategies to deplete mutp53 are 
not well-established, and no HSP40/JDPs inhibitors are clinically available. To 
identify compounds that bind to DNAJA1 and induce mutp53 degradation, we 
performed an in silico docking study of ~10 million of compounds from the ZINC 
database for the J-domain of DNAJA1. A compound 7-3 was identified, and its 
analogue A11 effectively reduced the levels of DNAJA1 and conformational mutp53 
with minimal effects on the levels of wild-type p53 and DNA-contact mutp53. A11 
suppressed migration and filopodia formation in a manner dependent on DNAJA1 and 
conformational mutp53. A mutant DNAJA1 with alanine mutations at predicted amino 
acids (tyrosine 7, lysine 44, and glutamine 47) failed to bind to A11. Cells 
expressing the mutant DNAJA1 became insensitive to A11-mediated depletion of 
DNAJA1 and mutp53 as well as A11-mediated inhibition of cell migration. Thus, 
A11 is the first HSP40/JDP inhibitor that has not been previously characterized 
for depleting DNAJA1 and subsequently conformational mutp53, leading to 
inhibition of cancer cell migration. A11 can be exploited for a novel treatment 
against cancers expressing conformational mutp53.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41420-022-01229-5
PMCID: PMC9622836
PMID: 36316326

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.