1. EMBO J. 2022 Dec 15;41(24):e110959. doi: 10.15252/embj.2022110959. Epub 2022
Oct  31.

Intramembrane client recognition potentiates the chaperone functions of 
calnexin.

Bloemeke N(1), Meighen-Berger K(1), Hitzenberger M(1), Bach NC(1), Parr M(2), 
Coelho JP(1), Frishman D(2), Zacharias M(1), Sieber SA(1), Feige MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioscience, Center for Functional Protein Assemblies (CPA), TUM 
School of Natural Sciences, Technical University of Munich, Garching, Germany.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics, TUM School of Life Sciences, Technical 
University of Munich, Freising, Germany.

One-third of the human proteome is comprised of membrane proteins, which are 
particularly vulnerable to misfolding and often require folding assistance by 
molecular chaperones. Calnexin (CNX), which engages client proteins via its 
sugar-binding lectin domain, is one of the most abundant ER chaperones, and 
plays an important role in membrane protein biogenesis. Based on mass 
spectrometric analyses, we here show that calnexin interacts with a large number 
of nonglycosylated membrane proteins, indicative of additional nonlectin binding 
modes. We find that calnexin preferentially bind misfolded membrane proteins and 
that it uses its single transmembrane domain (TMD) for client recognition. 
Combining experimental and computational approaches, we systematically dissect 
signatures for intramembrane client recognition by calnexin, and identify 
sequence motifs within the calnexin TMD region that mediate client binding. 
Building on this, we show that intramembrane client binding potentiates the 
chaperone functions of calnexin. Together, these data reveal a widespread role 
of calnexin client recognition in the lipid bilayer, which synergizes with its 
established lectin-based substrate binding. Molecular chaperones thus can 
combine different interaction modes to support the biogenesis of the diverse 
eukaryotic membrane proteome.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.2022110959
PMCID: PMC9753464
PMID: 36314723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]