1. Cancer Res Commun. 2022 Oct;2(10):1282-1292. doi:
10.1158/2767-9764.crc-22-0314.  Epub 2022 Oct 27.

Uterine lavage identifies cancer mutations and increased TP53 somatic mutation 
burden in individuals with ovarian cancer.

Ghezelayagh TS(1)(2), Kohrn BF(2), Fredrickson J(2), Manhardt E(1), Radke MR(1), 
Katz R(1), Gray HJ(1), Urban RR(1), Pennington KP(1), Liao JB(1), Doll KM(1), 
Simons EJ(1), Burzawa JK(1), Goff BA(1), Speiser P(3), Swisher EM(1), Norquist 
BM(1), Risques RA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Washington, Seattle, 
USA.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, USA.
(3)Medical University of Vienna, Austria.

Current screening methods for ovarian cancer (OC) have failed to demonstrate a 
significant reduction in mortality. Uterine lavage combined with TP53 ultra-deep 
sequencing for the detection of disseminated OC cells has emerged as a promising 
tool, but this approach has not been tested for early-stage disease or 
non-serous histologies. In addition, lavages carry multiple background 
mutations, the significance of which is poorly understood. Uterine lavage was 
collected preoperatively in 34 patients undergoing surgery for suspected ovarian 
malignancy including 14 patients with benign disease and 20 patients with OC (6 
non-serous and 14 high grade serous-like (serous)). Ultra-deep duplex sequencing 
(~3000x) with a panel of common OC genes identified the tumor mutation in 33% of 
non-serous (all early stage) and in 79% of serous cancers (including four early 
stage). In addition, all lavages carried multiple somatic mutations (average of 
25 mutations per lavage), more than half of which corresponded to common cancer 
driver mutations. Driver mutations in KRAS, PIK3CA, PTEN, PPP2R1A and ARID1A 
presented as larger clones than non-driver mutations and with similar frequency 
in lavages from patients with and without OC, indicating prevalent somatic 
evolution in all patients. Driver TP53 mutations, however, presented as 
significantly larger clones and with higher frequency in lavages from 
individuals with OC, suggesting that TP53-specific clonal expansions are linked 
to ovarian cancer development. Our results demonstrate that lavages capture 
cancer cells, even from early-stage cancers, as well as other clonal expansions 
and support further exploration of TP53 mutation burden as a potential OC risk 
factor.

DOI: 10.1158/2767-9764.crc-22-0314
PMCID: PMC9615025
PMID: 36311816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H.J. Gray reports other from UpToDate outside 
the submitted work. J.B. Liao reports grants from Merck, Precigen, AstraZeneca, 
Forty-Seven, Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma Oncology, Laekna Therapeutics, Instil 
Bio, Harpoon Therapeutics, and Genentech outside the submitted work. P. Speiser 
reports a patent to Three Lumen Balloon Catheter Apparatus US2015305725 issued 
and a patent to Non-Invasive Cancer Diagnosis EP51899 20130131 issued; and is 
shareholder of OVARTEC GmbH. E.M. Swisher reports grants from NIH during the 
conduct of the study. R.A. Risques reports grants from NCI, Rivkin Center, 
Minnesota Ovarian Cancer Alliance; and personal fees and other from TwinStrand 
Biosciences during the conduct of the study; grants from NCI and Rivkin Center; 
other from NanoString Technologies; and personal fees, non-financial support, 
and other from TwinStrand Biosciences outside the submitted work; in addition, 
R.A. Risques has a patent to WO/2018/175997 pending, licensed, and with 
royalties paid. No disclosures were reported by the other authors.