1. J Hematol Oncol. 2022 Nov 4;15(1):161. doi: 10.1186/s13045-022-01381-6.

JMJD4-demethylated RIG-I prevents hepatic steatosis and carcinogenesis.

Li Z(#)(1), Zhou Y(#)(1), Jia K(#)(1), Yang Y(2), Zhang L(1), Wang S(1), Dong 
Y(1), Wang M(1), Li Y(1), Lu S(1), Zhang W(1), Zhang L(1), Fan Y(1), Zhang D(1), 
Li N(1), Yu Y(1), Cao X(3)(4), Hou J(5).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology and Institute of Immunology, 
Second Military Medical University, 800 Xiangyin Road, Shanghai, 200433, China.
(2)Center for Immunotherapy, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 
100005, China.
(3)National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology and Institute of Immunology, 
Second Military Medical University, 800 Xiangyin Road, Shanghai, 200433, China. 
caoxt@immunol.org.
(4)Center for Immunotherapy, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 
100005, China. caoxt@immunol.org.
(5)National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology and Institute of Immunology, 
Second Military Medical University, 800 Xiangyin Road, Shanghai, 200433, China. 
houjin@immunol.org.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Hepatocarcinogenesis is driven by necroinflammation or metabolic 
disorders, and the underlying mechanisms remain largely elusive. We previously 
found that retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I), a sensor for recognizing RNA 
virus in innate immune cells, is mainly expressed by parenchymal hepatocytes in 
the liver. However, its roles in hepatocarcinogenesis are unknown, which is 
intensively investigated in this study.
METHODS: DEN-induced necroinflammation-driven hepatocarcinogenesis and STAM 
NASH-hepatocarcinogenesis were carried out in hepatocyte-specific RIG-I knockout 
mice. The post-translational modification of RIG-I was determined by mass 
spectrometry, and specific antibodies against methylated lysine sites and the 
RIG-I lysine mutant mice were constructed to identify the functions of RIG-I 
methylation.
RESULTS: We interestingly found that DEN-induced hepatocarcinogenesis was 
enhanced, while NASH-induced hepatocarcinogenesis was suppressed by 
hepatocyte-specific RIG-I deficiency. Further, IL-6 decreased RIG-I expression 
in HCC progenitor cells (HcPCs), which then viciously promoted IL-6 effector 
signaling and drove HcPCs to fully established HCC. RIG-I expression was 
increased by HFD, which then enhanced cholesterol synthesis and steatosis, and 
the in-turn NASH and NASH-induced hepatocarcinogenesis. Mechanistically, RIG-I 
was constitutively mono-methylated at K18 and K146, and demethylase 
JMJD4-mediated RIG-I demethylation suppressed IL-6-STAT3 signaling. The 
constitutive methylated RIG-I associated with AMPKα to inhibit HMGCR 
phosphorylation, thus promoting HMGCR enzymatic activity and cholesterol 
synthesis. Clinically, RIG-I was decreased in human hepatic precancerous 
dysplastic nodules while increased in NAFLD livers, which were in accordance 
with the data in mouse models.
CONCLUSIONS: Decreased RIG-I in HcPCs promotes necroinflammation-induced 
hepatocarcinogenesis, while increased constitutive methylated RIG-I enhances 
steatosis and NASH-induced hepatocarcinogenesis. JMJD4-demethylated RIG-I 
prevents both necroinflammation and NASH-induced hepatocarcinogenesis, which 
provides mechanistic insight and potential target for preventing HCC.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13045-022-01381-6
PMCID: PMC9636772
PMID: 36333807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.