1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2022 Dec 13;30:465-476. doi:
10.1016/j.omtn.2022.10.021.  Epub 2022 Nov 2.

Chimeric mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine induces protective immunity against Omicron 
and Delta variants.

Hu Q(1), Zhao Y(1), Shaabani N(1), Lyu X(1), Powers C(1), Sun H(1), Cruz V(1), 
Stegman K(1), Xu J(1), Fossier A(1), Huang Y(1), Ho G(1), Kao Y(1), Wang Z(1), 
Wang Z(1), Hu Y(1), Zheng Y(1), Kyaw L(1), Zuluaga C(1), Wang H(1), Pei H(1), 
Allen R(1), Xie H(1), Ji H(1), Chen R(1).

Author information:
(1)Sorrento Therapeutics Inc., 4955 Directors Place, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

The emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VOCs) exhibit enhanced transmission 
and immune escape, reducing the effectiveness of currently approved mRNA 
vaccines. To achieve wider coverage of VOCs, we first constructed a cohort of 
mRNAs harboring a furin cleavage mutation in the spike (S) protein of 
predominant VOCs, including Alpha (B.1.1.7), Beta (B.1.351), Gamma (P.1), and 
Delta (B.1.617.2). The mutation abolished the cleavage between the S1 and S2 
subunits. Systematic evaluation in vaccinated mice discovered that individual 
VOC mRNAs elicited strong neutralizing activity in a VOC-specific manner. In 
particular, the neutralizing antibodies (nAb) produced by immunization with 
Beta-Furin and Washington (WA)-Furin mRNAs showed potent cross-reactivity with 
other VOCs. However, neither mRNA elicited strong neutralizing activity against 
the Omicron variant. Hence, we further developed an Omicron-specific mRNA 
vaccine that restored protection against the original Omicron variant and some 
sublineages. Finally, to broaden the protection spectrum of the new Omicron mRNA 
vaccine, we engineered an mRNA-based chimeric immunogen by introducing the 
receptor-binding domain of Delta variant into the entire S antigen of Omicron. 
The resultant chimeric mRNA induced potent and broadly nAbs against Omicron and 
Delta, which paves the way to developing new vaccine candidates to target 
emerging variants in the future.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2022.10.021
PMCID: PMC9628198
PMID: 36345542

Conflict of interest statement: Sorrento authors own options and/or stock of the 
company. This work has been described in one or more provisional patent 
applications. H.J. is an officer at Sorrento Therapeutics, Inc.