1. Chem Sci. 2022 Sep 28;13(42):12389-12395. doi: 10.1039/d2sc03612f. eCollection
 2022 Nov 2.

Deciphering and reprogramming the cyclization regioselectivity in bifurcation of 
indole alkaloid biosynthesis.

Wang Z(1)(2), Xiao Y(1)(2), Wu S(1)(2), Chen J(3), Li A(4), Tatsis EC(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics, CAS Center for 
Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology 
and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai 200032 China 
etatsis@cemps.ac.cn evangelos.tatsis@jic.ac.uk.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Tropical Plant Resources and Sustainable Use, Xishuangbanna 
Tropical Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences Mengla County China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Bioorganic and Natural Product Chemistry, Shanghai 
Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai China.
(5)CEPAMS - CAS-JIC Centre of Excellence for Plant and Microbial Sciences China.

The metabolism of monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIAs) is an outstanding example 
of how plants shape chemical diversity from a single precursor. Here we report 
the discovery of novel enzymes from the Alstonia scholaris tree, a cytochrome 
P450, an NADPH dependent oxidoreductase and a BAHD acyltransferase that together 
synthesize the indole alkaloid akuammiline with a unique methanoquinolizidine 
cage structure. The two paralogous cytochrome P450 enzymes rhazimal synthase 
(AsRHS) and geissoschizine oxidase (AsGO) catalyse the cyclization of the common 
precursor geissoschizine and they direct the MIA metabolism towards to the two 
structurally distinct and medicinally important MIA classes of akuammilan and 
strychnos alkaloids, respectively. To understand the pathway divergence, we 
investigated the catalytic mechanism of the two P450 enzymes by homology 
modelling and reciprocal mutations. Upon conducting mutant enzyme assays, we 
identified a single amino acid residue that mediates the space in active sites, 
switches the enzymatic reaction outcome and impacts the cyclization 
regioselectivity. Our results represent a significant advance in MIA metabolism, 
paving the way for discovery of downstream genes in akuammilan alkaloid 
biosynthesis and facilitating future synthetic biology applications. We 
anticipate that our work presents, for the first time, insights at the molecular 
level for plant P450 catalytic activity with a significant key role in the 
diversification of alkaloid metabolism, and provides the basis for designing new 
drugs.

This journal is Â© The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d2sc03612f
PMCID: PMC9628931
PMID: 36349266

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.