1. Dent J (Basel). 2022 Oct 31;10(11):205. doi: 10.3390/dj10110205.

The Incidence of Dental Caries in Children with Down Syndrome: A Systematic 
Review and Meta-Analysis.

Martins M(1), Mascarenhas P(2), Evangelista JG(2), Barahona I(2), Tavares V(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Universitário Egas Moniz, Quinta da Granja, Monte de Caparica, 
2829-511 Almada, Portugal.
(2)Centro de Investigação Interdisciplinar Egas Moniz (CiiEM), Instituto 
Universitário Egas Moniz, Quinta da Granja, Monte de Caparica, 2829-511 Almada, 
Portugal.

Scientific evidence regarding the incidence of dental caries in Down syndrome 
(DS) patients is limited and sometimes presents divergent opinions among 
authors, making it difficult to reach definitive conclusions. We aimed to 
evaluate the caries incidence in the DS pediatric population and compare it 
against healthy controls. The search was performed using 4 universal databases: 
Cochrane, B-on, Biomed, and PubMed. The selected articles were synthesized and 
subsequently evaluated according to an adaptation of the Quality Assessment 
Checklist for Prevalence Studies risk of bias tool, and analysis charts were 
performed by the Risk of Bias visualization tool (ROBVIS). Statistics and graphs 
were performed by Open Meta Analyst and JASP software. The confounding effect on 
caries incidence of the following factors was evaluated through meta-regression: 
age, Male/Female (M/F) ratio, DMFT, dmft, and study geographic location. 
Overall, the incidence of caries in the DS population was 49.9%, whereas in the 
control population was 63.4%. The M/F ratio, DMFT, and dmft significantly 
affected the incidence of DS individuals (p-value < 0.05). The evidence 
regarding the lower pooled incidence of caries in individuals with DS regarding 
controls is limited by the few scientific reports available and cross-section 
designs. Therefore, further studies are needed to confirm these results.

DOI: 10.3390/dj10110205
PMCID: PMC9689859
PMID: 36354650

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.