1. Micromachines (Basel). 2022 Oct 29;13(11):1858. doi: 10.3390/mi13111858.

Design and Manufacturing of Equipment for Investigation of Low Frequency 
Bioimpedance.

Pîslaru-Dănescu L(1), Zărnescu GC(1), Telipan G(1), Stoica V(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Sensors/Actuators and Energy Harvesting, National Institute for 
Research and Development in Electrical Engineering ICPE-CA, 030138 Bucharest, 
Romania.

The purpose of this study was to highlight a method of making equipment for the 
investigation of low frequency bioimpedance. A constant current with an average 
value of I = 100 µA is injected into the human body via means of current 
injection electrodes, and the biological signal is taken from the electrodes of 
electric potential charged with the biopotentials generated by the human body. 
The resulting voltage, ΔU is processed by the electronic conditioning system. 
The mathematical model of the four-electrode system in contact with the skin, 
and considering a target organ, was simplified to a single equivalent impedance. 
The capacitive filter low passes down from the differential input of the first 
instrumentation amplifier together with the isolated capacitive barrier 
integrated in the precision isolated secondary amplifier and maintains the 
biological signal taken from the electrodes charged with the undistorted 
biopotentials generated by the human body. Mass loops are avoided, and any 
electric shocks or electrostatic discharges are prevented. In addition, for 
small amplitudes of the biological signal, electromagnetic interferences of 
below 100 Hz of the power supply network were eliminated by using an active 
fourth-order Bessel filtering module. The measurements performed for the low 
frequency of f = 100 Hz on the volunteers showed for the investigated organs 
that the bioelectrical resistivities vary from 90 Ωcm up to 450 Ωcm, and that 
these are in agreement with other published and disseminated results for each 
body zone.

DOI: 10.3390/mi13111858
PMCID: PMC9698562
PMID: 36363879

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.