1. Pharmaceutics. 2022 Oct 27;14(11):2313. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14112313.

Scaffolds Based on Silk Fibroin with Decellularized Rat Liver Microparticles: 
Investigation of the Structure, Biological Properties and Regenerative Potential 
for Skin Wound Healing.

Bobrova M(1), Safonova L(1), Efimov A(1), Lyundup A(2), Mozheiko N(1), Agapova 
O(1), Agapov I(1).

Author information:
(1)Academician V.I. Shumakov National Medical Research Center of Transplantology 
and Artificial Organs, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, 1 
Shchukinskaya Street, 123182 Moscow, Russia.
(2)Educational Resource Center for Cellular Technologies, Peoples' Friendship 
University of Russia (RUDN University), 6 Miklukho-Maklaya Street, 117198 
Moscow, Russia.

The development of advanced biomaterials and constructs for accelerated recovery 
of damaged tissues is a key direction in regenerative medicine. Biocompatible 
scaffolds based on natural biopolymers are widely used for these tasks. Organ 
decellularization enables obtaining a cell-free extracellular matrix (ECM) with 
preserved composition and biological activity. The objectives of the present 
work were combining these two approaches for the development of a composite 
scaffold based on silk fibroin and ECM microparticles and assessing its 
structure, biological properties, and regenerative potential. ECM microparticles 
were obtained by grinding the decellularized matrix of Wistar rat liver in 
liquid nitrogen. Scaffolds in the form of films were prepared by the casting 
method. The sinuous and rough topography of the scaffold surface was assessed by 
the scanning probe nanotomography (SPNT) technique. The inclusion of ECM 
microparticles in the composition did not affect the elasticity and tensile 
strength of the scaffolds. The obtained scaffold was non-toxic to cells, 
maintained high levels of adhesion and proliferation of mouse 3T3 fibroblast and 
Hep-G2 cells, and showed high regenerative potential, which was studied in the 
experimental model of full-thickness rat skin wound healing. The wound healing 
was accelerated by 1.74 times in comparison with the control.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14112313
PMCID: PMC9693194
PMID: 36365132

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.