1. Life (Basel). 2022 Nov 7;12(11):1802. doi: 10.3390/life12111802.

Recombinant Globular Domain of TcpA Pilin from Vibrio cholerae El Tor: Recovery 
from Inclusion Bodies and Structural Characterization.

Marchenkov V(1), Dubovitskya E(2), Kotova N(2), Tuchkov I(2), Smirnova N(2), 
Marchenko N(1), Surin A(1)(3)(4), Filimonov V(1), Semisotnov G(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Protein Research, Russian Academy of Sciences, Institutskaya 
Street 4, 142290 Pushchino, Russia.
(2)Russian Antiplague Scientific Research Institute "Microbe" of 
Rospotrebnadzor, Universitetskaya Street 46, 410005 Saratov, Russia.
(3)Branch of the Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Prospekt Nauki 6, 142290 Pushchino, Russia.
(4)State Research Centre for Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 142279 
Obolensk, Russia.

The production of recombinant proteins in Escherichia coli cells is often 
hampered by aggregation of newly synthesized proteins and formation of inclusion 
bodies. Here we propose the use of transverse urea gradient electrophoresis 
(TUGE) in testing the capability of folding of a recombinant protein from 
inclusion bodies dissolved in urea. A plasmid encoding the amino acid sequence 
55-224 of TcpA pilin (C-terminal globular domain: TcpA-C) from Vibrio cholerae 
El Tor enlarged by a His-tag on its N-terminus was expressed in E. coli cells. 
The major fraction (about 90%) of the target polypeptide was detected in cell 
debris. The polypeptide was isolated from the soluble fraction and recovered 
from inclusion bodies after their urea treatment. Some structural properties of 
the polypeptide from each sample proved identical. The refolding protocol was 
developed on the basis of TUGE data and successfully used for the protein 
large-scale recovery from inclusion bodies. Spectral, hydrodynamic, and 
thermodynamic characteristics of the recombinant TcpA recovered from inclusion 
bodies indicate the presence of a globular conformation with a pronounced 
secondary structure and a rigid tertiary structure, which is promising for the 
design of immunodiagnostics preparations aimed to assess the pilin level in 
different strains of V. cholerae and to develop cholera vaccines.

DOI: 10.3390/life12111802
PMCID: PMC9695179
PMID: 36362959

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.