1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Dec;298(12):102686. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102686. Epub
2022  Nov 9.

Essential roles of the cytokine oncostatin M in crosstalk between muscle fibers 
and immune cells in skeletal muscle after aerobic exercise.

Komori T(1), Morikawa Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, 
Japan. Electronic address: yoshim@wakayama-med.ac.jp.

Crosstalk between muscle fibers and immune cells is well known in the processes 
of muscle repair after exercise, especially resistance exercise. In aerobic 
exercise, however, this crosstalk is not fully understood. In the present study, 
we found that macrophages, especially anti-inflammatory (M2) macrophages, and 
neutrophils accumulated in skeletal muscles of mice 24 h after a single bout of 
an aerobic exercise. The expression of oncostatin M (OSM), a member of the 
interleukin 6 family of cytokines, was also increased in muscle fibers 
immediately after the exercise. In addition, we determined that deficiency of 
OSM in mice inhibited the exercise-induced accumulation of M2 macrophages and 
neutrophils, whereas intramuscular injection of OSM increased these immune cells 
in skeletal muscles. Furthermore, the chemokines related to the recruitment of 
macrophages and neutrophils were induced in skeletal muscles after aerobic 
exercise, which were attenuated in OSM-deficient mice. Among them, CC chemokine 
ligand 2, CC chemokine ligand 7, and CXC chemokine ligand 1 were induced by OSM 
in skeletal muscles. Next, we analyzed the direct effects of OSM on the skeletal 
muscle macrophages, because the OSM receptor β subunit was expressed 
predominantly in macrophages in the skeletal muscle. OSM directly induced the 
expression of these chemokines and anti-inflammatory markers in the skeletal 
muscle macrophages. From these findings, we conclude that OSM is essential for 
aerobic exercise-induced accumulation of M2 macrophages and neutrophils in the 
skeletal muscle partly through the regulation of chemokine expression in 
macrophages.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102686
PMCID: PMC9720348
PMID: 36370846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.