1. Heliyon. 2022 Oct 31;8(11):e11314. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e11314. 
eCollection 2022 Nov.

A review: extraction, phytochemicals, and biological activities of rambutan 
(Nephelium lappaceum L) peel extract.

Tingting Z(1), Xiuli Z(2), Kun W(1), Liping S(1), Yongliang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Food Science and Engineering, Kunming University of Science and 
Technology, No. 727 South Jingming Road, Kunming, Yunnan 650500, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan, No.157 Jinbi 
Road, Kunming, Yunnan 650034, China.

Rambutan (Nephelium lappaceum L.) peels are produced during application process. 
Drying methods of rambutan peel, including open sun, oven, oven vacuum, and 
freeze-drying, have been describes in this study. The extraction technologies of 
dried rambutan peels were reviewed, such as maceration and hot extraction, 
microwave-assisted extraction, ultrasonic-assisted extraction, and supercritical 
fluid extraction. The phytochemicals of rambutan peel extracts were analyzed, 
and the purification and stability of geraniin was reviewed. Rambutan peel 
extracts exhibit wide bioactivities in vitro and in vivo, and these 
bioactivities depend chiefly on the phenolic contents and profiles in the 
different extracts. The safety of rambutan peel extracts was analyzed. In 
addition, rambutan peel extracts could be used as important components to make 
different products, which are potentially applied in food, medicine, and 
cosmetic. However, the extracts efficiency must be further increased using some 
emerging technologies. Furthermore, the bioactive mechanism and bioavailability 
of the extract in human system should be further evaluated.

Â© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e11314
PMCID: PMC9647437
PMID: 36387459

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.