1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 Oct 31;12:995933. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2022.995933. eCollection 2022.

Subversion of host cell signaling: The arsenal of Rickettsial species.

Huang D(1), Luo J(1), OuYang X(2), Song L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Center of Pathogen Biology and Infectious 
Disease, Key Laboratory of Organ Regeneration and Transplantation of the 
Ministry of Education, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of 
Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing, China.

Rickettsia is a genus of nonmotile, Gram-negative, non-spore-forming, highly 
pleomorphic bacteria that cause severe epidemic rickettsioses. The spotted fever 
group and typhi group are major members of the genus Rickettsia. Rickettsial 
species from the two groups subvert diverse host cellular processes, including 
membrane dynamics, actin cytoskeleton dynamics, phosphoinositide metabolism, 
intracellular trafficking, and immune defense, to promote their host 
colonization and intercellular transmission through secreted effectors 
(virulence factors). However, lineage-specific rickettsiae have exploited 
divergent strategies to accomplish such challenging tasks and these elaborated 
strategies focus on distinct host cell processes. In the present review, we 
summarized current understandings of how different rickettsial species employ 
their effectors' arsenal to affect host cellular processes in order to promote 
their own replication or to avoid destruction.

Copyright Â© 2022 Huang, Luo, OuYang and Song.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.995933
PMCID: PMC9659576
PMID: 36389139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer YQ declared a 
past co-authorship with the author XO to the handling editor.