1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2022 Nov 21;16(11):e0010754. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0010754. eCollection 2022 Nov.

Molecular detection and characterisation of the first Japanese encephalitis 
virus belonging to genotype IV acquired in Australia.

Sikazwe C(1), Neave MJ(2), Michie A(1), Mileto P(2), Wang J(2), Cooper N(1), 
Levy A(1)(3), Imrie A(1)(3), Baird RW(4), Currie BJ(4), Speers D(1), Mackenzie 
JS(1)(5), Smith DW(1), Williams DT(2).

Author information:
(1)PathWest Laboratory Medicine Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia, 
Australia.
(2)CSIRO Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness, Geelong, Victoria, 
Australia.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Western Australia, Nedlands, 
Western Australia, Australia.
(4)Pathology and Infectious Diseases Departments, Royal Darwin Hospital, Darwin, 
Northern Territory, Australia.
(5)Faculty of Health Sciences, Curtin University, Bentley, Western Australia, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: A fatal case of Japanese encephalitis (JE) occurred in a resident of 
the Tiwi Islands, in the Northern Territory of Australia in February 2021, 
preceding the large JE outbreak in south-eastern Australia in 2022. This study 
reports the detection, whole genome sequencing and analysis of the virus 
responsible (designated JEV/Australia/NT_Tiwi Islands/2021).
METHODS: Reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) testing was performed 
on post-mortem brain specimens using a range of JE virus (JEV)-specific assays. 
Virus isolation from brain specimens was attempted by inoculation of mosquito 
and mammalian cells or embryonated chicken eggs. Whole genome sequencing was 
undertaken using a combination of Illumina next generation sequencing 
methodologies, including a tiling amplicon approach. Phylogenetic and selection 
analyses were performed using alignments of the Tiwi Islands JEV genome and 
envelope (E) protein gene sequences and publicly available JEV sequences.
RESULTS: Virus isolation was unsuccessful and JEV RNA was detected only by 
RT-qPCR assays capable of detecting all JEV genotypes. Phylogenetic analysis 
revealed that the Tiwi Islands strain is a divergent member of genotype IV (GIV) 
and is closely related to the 2022 Australian outbreak virus (99.8% nucleotide 
identity). The Australian strains share highest levels of nucleotide identity 
with Indonesian viruses from 2017 and 2019 (96.7-96.8%). The most recent common 
ancestor of this Australian-Indonesian clade was estimated to have emerged in 
2007 (95% HPD range: 1998-2014). Positive selection was detected using two 
methods (MEME and FEL) at several sites in the E and non-structural protein 
genes, including a single site in the E protein (S194N) unique to the Australian 
GIV strains.
CONCLUSION: This case represents the first detection of GIV JEV acquired in 
Australia, and only the second confirmed fatal human infection with a GIV JEV 
strain. The close phylogenetic relationship between the Tiwi Islands strain and 
recent Indonesian viruses is indicative of the origin of this novel GIV lineage, 
which we estimate has circulated in the region for several years prior to the 
Tiwi Islands case.

Copyright: Â© 2022 Sikazwe et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0010754
PMCID: PMC9721490
PMID: 36409739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.