1. Pathogens. 2022 Nov 19;11(11):1385. doi: 10.3390/pathogens11111385.

Differential Impact of Specific Amino Acid Residues on the Characteristics of 
Avian Influenza Viruses in Mammalian Systems.

Mashaal D(1), Mahmoud SH(2), MÃ¼ller C(3), Abo Shama NM(2), Kamer AA(1), 
Abdelaziz AA(1), Ali MA(2), Pleschka S(3)(4), Mostafa A(2).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Microbiology Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tanta 
University, Tanta 31527, Egypt.
(2)Center of Scientific Excellence for Influenza Viruses, National Research 
Centre, Giza 12622, Egypt.
(3)Institute of Medical Virology, Justus Liebig University Giessen, 
Schubertstrasse 81, 35392 Giessen, Germany.
(4)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site 
Giessen-Marburg-Langen, 35392 Giessen, Germany.

Avian influenza virus (AIV) H9N2 was declared to be endemic in birds of the 
Middle East, in particular in Egypt, with multiple cases of human infections. 
Despite concerns about the pandemic threat posed by H9N2 AIV, due to the fact 
that its receptor specificity is similar to that of human influenza viruses, its 
morbidity and mortality rates in humans are so far negligible. However, the 
acquisition of specific adaptive amino acid (aa) mutations in the viral 
polymerase can enhance cross-species transmission of the virus itself or of 
reassortants, which gained these changes. The polymerase basic protein 2 (PB2) 
is one of the key determinants for AIV adaptation towards mammals. Although 
mammalian pathogenicity-related mutations (MPMs) in PB2 genes were identified in 
different AIVs, the specific effect of single or multiple mutations on viral 
fitness has not been compared so far. Here, we studied the effect of the aa K at 
position 591, which was frequently reported in the PB2 of Egyptian H9N2 
isolates, on the proliferation efficiency and polymerase activity of an H5N1 
(clade 2.2.1.2) AIV already carrying the mammalian adaptive mutation 627K. Using 
reverse genetics, we generated a set of recombinant parental strains and H5N1 
variants carrying the avian-like 591Q/627E or mammalian-like adaptive mutations 
591K/627K (H5N1EGY, H9N2EGY, H5N1PB2-H9N2EGY, H5N1H9N2_PB2_K591Q, H5N1PB2_K627E, 
H5N1PB2_K627E/591K, H5N1PB2_627K/591K). Regardless of the avian-like 627E or the 
mammalian-adaptive 627K, both variants carrying the 591K (H5N1PB2_K627E/591K, 
H5N1PB2_627K/591K) and the reassortant H5N1PB2-H9N2EGY replicated to 
significantly higher levels in mammalian continuous MDCK and Calu-3 cell lines 
and primary normal human bronchial epithelial cells than the parental H5N1EGY 
virus (carrying solely the 627K adaptive mutation). Expectedly, the H5N1 
variants carrying avian-like PB2 mutations (H5N1H9N2_PB2_K591Q, H5N1PB2_K627E) 
replicated to significantly lower levels than the parental H5N1EGY virus in the 
predefined primary and continuous mammalian cell line systems. Consistently, the 
activity of H5N1 subtype AIV polymerase complexes comprising PB2 segments with 
singular 591K or combined with 627K was significantly enhanced when compared to 
parental H5N1EGY and H9N2EGY. This study emphasizes the significant impact of 
591K containing PB2 segments in the background of H5N1 polymerase on viral 
fitness in addition to the well-known MPM 627K in vitro.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens11111385
PMCID: PMC9698692
PMID: 36422635

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.