1. Cell Death Dis. 2022 Nov 27;13(11):1003. doi: 10.1038/s41419-022-05438-9.

GOLPH3 protein controls organ growth by interacting with TOR signaling proteins 
in Drosophila.

Frappaolo A(#)(1), Karimpour-Ghahnavieh A(#)(1), Cesare G(2), Sechi S(1), 
Fraschini R(3), Vaccari T(2), Giansanti MG(4).

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Biologia e Patologia Molecolari del CNR, c/o Dipartimento di 
Biologia e Biotecnologie, Sapienza Università di Roma, 00185, Roma, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di Milano, 20133, Milano, 
Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie e Bioscienze, Università degli studi di Milano 
Bicocca, 20126, Milano, Italy.
(4)Istituto di Biologia e Patologia Molecolari del CNR, c/o Dipartimento di 
Biologia e Biotecnologie, Sapienza Università di Roma, 00185, Roma, Italy. 
mariagrazia.giansanti@uniroma1.it.
(#)Contributed equally

The oncoprotein GOLPH3 (Golgi phosphoprotein 3) is an evolutionarily conserved 
phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate effector, mainly localized to the Golgi 
apparatus, where it supports organelle architecture and vesicular trafficking. 
Overexpression of human GOLPH3 correlates with poor prognosis in several cancer 
types and is associated with enhanced signaling downstream of mTOR (mechanistic 
target of rapamycin). However, the molecular link between GOLPH3 and mTOR 
remains elusive. Studies in Drosophila melanogaster have shown that 
Translationally controlled tumor protein (Tctp) and 14-3-3 proteins are required 
for organ growth by supporting the function of the small GTPase Ras homolog 
enriched in the brain (Rheb) during mTORC1 (mTOR complex 1) signaling. Here we 
demonstrate that Drosophila GOLPH3 (dGOLPH3) physically interacts with Tctp and 
14-3-3ζ. RNAi-mediated knockdown of dGOLPH3 reduces wing and eye size and 
enhances the phenotypes of Tctp RNAi. This phenotype is partially rescued by 
overexpression of Tctp, 14-3-3ζ, or Rheb. We also show that the Golgi 
localization of Rheb in Drosophila cells depends on dGOLPH3. Consistent with 
dGOLPH3 involvement in Rheb-mediated mTORC1 activation, depletion of dGOLPH3 
also reduces levels of phosphorylated ribosomal S6 kinase, a downstream target 
of mTORC1. Finally, the autophagy flux and the expression of autophagic 
transcription factors of the TFEB family, which anti correlates with mTOR 
signaling, are compromised upon reduction of dGOLPH3. Overall, our data provide 
the first in vivo demonstration that GOLPH3 regulates organ growth by directly 
associating with mTOR signaling proteins.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-022-05438-9
PMCID: PMC9701223
PMID: 36435842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.