1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Nov 16;23(22):14148. doi: 10.3390/ijms232214148.

Role of 5-HT2A, 5-HT2C, 5-HT1A and TAAR1 Receptors in the Head Twitch Response 
Induced by 5-Hydroxytryptophan and Psilocybin: Translational Implications.

Shahar O(1), Botvinnik A(1), Esh-Zuntz N(1), Brownstien M(1), Wolf R(1), Lotan 
A(1), Wolf G(1), Lerer B(1), Lifschytz T(1).

Author information:
(1)Biological Psychiatry Laboratory and Hadassah BrainLabs, Hadassah Medical 
Center, Hebrew University Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

There is increasing interest in the therapeutic potential of psilocybin. In 
rodents, the serotonin precursor, 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) and psilocybin 
induce a characteristic 5-HT2A receptor (5-HT2AR)-mediated head twitch response 
(HTR), which is correlated with the human psychedelic trip. We examined the role 
of other serotonergic receptors and the trace amine -associated receptor 1 
(TAAR1) in modulating 5-HTP- and psilocybin-induced HTR. Male C57BL/6J mice (11 
weeks, ~30 g) were administered 5-HTP, 50-250 mg/kg i.p., 200 mg/kg i.p. after 
pretreatment with 5-HT/TAAR1 receptor modulators, psilocybin 0.1-25.6 mg/kg i.p. 
or 4.4 mg/kg i.p., immediately preceded by 5-HT/TAAR1 receptor modulators. HTR 
was assessed in a custom-built magnetometer. 5-HTP and psilocybin induced a 
dose-dependent increase in the frequency of HTR over 20 min with attenuation by 
the 5-HT2AR antagonist, M100907, and the 5-HT1AR agonist, 8-OH-DPAT. The 5-HT2CR 
antagonist, RS-102221, enhanced HTR at lower doses but reduced it at higher 
doses. The TAAR1 antagonist, EPPTB, reduced 5-HTP- but not psilocybin-induced 
HTR. We have confirmed the key role of 5-HT2AR in HTR, an inhibitory effect of 
5-HT1AR, a bimodal contribution of 5-HT2CR and a role of TAAR1 in modulating HTR 
induced by 5-HTP. Compounds that modulate psychedelic-induced HTR have important 
potential in the emerging therapeutic use of these compounds.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232214148
PMCID: PMC9698447
PMID: 36430623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Lerer B. is a consultant to Back of the Yards 
algae sciences (BYAS) and Parow Entheobiosciences (PEB) and is listed as a 
co-inventor on a patent assigned to PEB describing concurrent treatment with 
psychedelics and 5-HT1A agonists that is assigned to BYAS.