1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Nov 9;13:1031969. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1031969. 
eCollection 2022.

Prospective population pharmacokinetic study of tacrolimus in adult recipients 
early after liver transplantation: A comparison of Michaelis-Menten and 
theory-based pharmacokinetic models.

Cai XJ(1)(1), Li RD(2), Li JH(2), Tao YF(2), Zhang QB(2), Shen CH(2), Zhang 
XF(2), Wang ZX(2), Jiao Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.

Background and Objective: Tacrolimus, a calcineurin inhibitor widely used as a 
potent immunosuppressant to prevent graft rejection, exhibits nonlinear kinetics 
in patients with kidney transplantation and nephrotic syndrome. However, whether 
nonlinear drug metabolism occurs in adult patients undergoing liver 
transplantation remains unclear, as do the main underlying mechanisms. 
Therefore, here we aimed to further confirm the characteristics of nonlinearity 
through a large sample size, and determine the potential influence of 
nonlinearity and its possible mechanisms. Methods: In total, 906 trough 
concentrations from 176 adult patients (150 men/26 women; average age: 50.68 ± 
9.71 years, average weight: 64.54 ± 11.85 kg after first liver transplantation) 
were included in this study. Population pharmacokinetic analysis was performed 
using NONMEM®. Two modeling strategies, theory-based linear compartmental and 
nonlinear Michaelis-Menten (MM) models, were evaluated and compared. Potential 
covariates were screened using a stepwise approach. Bootstrap, prediction-, and 
simulation-based diagnostics (prediction-corrected visual predictive checks) 
were performed to determine model stability and predictive performance. Finally, 
Monte Carlo simulations based on the superior model were conducted to design 
dosing regimens. Results: Postoperative days (POD), Aspartate aminotransferase 
(AST), daily tacrolimus dose, triazole antifungal agent (TAF) co-therapy, and 
recipient CYP3A5*3 genotype constituted the main factors in the theory-based 
compartmental final model, whereas POD, Total serum bilirubin (TBIL), 
Haematocrit (HCT), TAF co-therapy, and recipient CYP3A5*3 genotype were 
important in the nonlinear MM model. The theory-based final model exhibited 
234 L h-1 apparent plasma clearance and 11,000 L plasma distribution volume. The 
maximum dose rate (V max ) of the nonlinear MM model was 6.62 mg day-1; the 
average concentration at steady state at half-V max (K m ) was 6.46 ng ml-1. The 
nonlinear MM final model was superior to the theory-based final model and used 
to propose dosing regimens based on simulations. Conclusion: Our findings 
demonstrate that saturated tacrolimus concentration-dependent binding to 
erythrocytes and the influence of daily tacrolimus dose on metabolism may partly 
contribute to nonlinearity. Further investigation is needed is need to explore 
the causes of nonlinear pharmacokinetic of tacrolimus. The nonlinear MM model 
can provide reliable support for tacrolimus dosing optimization and adjustment 
in adult patients undergoing liver transplantation.

Copyright © 2022 Cai, Li, Li, Tao, Zhang, Shen, Zhang, Wang and Jiao.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1031969
PMCID: PMC9681907
PMID: 36438793

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.