1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Nov 8;23(22):13738. doi: 10.3390/ijms232213738.

Cell Metabolomics Reveals the Potential Mechanism of Aloe Emodin and Emodin 
Inhibiting Breast Cancer Metastasis.

Cheng G(1), Liu Z(1), Zheng Z(1), Song F(1), Zhuang X(2), Liu S(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry & Jilin Province Key 
Laboratory of Chinese Medicine Chemistry and Mass Spectrometry & National Center 
of Mass Spectrometry in Changchun, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, China.
(2)Experiment Center for Science and Technology, Shanghai University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China.

Metastasis is one of the main obstacles for the treatment and prognosis of 
breast cancer. In this study, the effects and possible mechanisms of aloe emodin 
(AE) and emodin (EMD) for inhibiting breast cancer metastasis were investigated 
via cell metabolomics. First, a co-culture model of MCF-7 and HUVEC cells was 
established and compared with a traditional single culture of MCF-7 cells. The 
results showed that HUVEC cells could promote the development of cancer cells to 
a malignant phenotype. Moreover, AE and EMD could inhibit adhesion, invasion, 
and angiogenesis and induce anoikis of MCF-7 cells in co-culture model. Then, 
the potential mechanisms behind AE and EMD inhibition of MCF-7 cell metastasis 
were explored using a metabolomics method based on UPLC-Q-TOF/MS multivariate 
statistical analysis. Consequently, 27 and 13 biomarkers were identified in AE 
and EMD groups, respectively, including polyamine metabolism, methionine cycle, 
TCA cycle, glutathione metabolism, purine metabolism, and aspartate synthesis. 
The typical metabolites were quantitatively analyzed, and the results showed 
that the inhibitory effect of AE was significantly better than EMD. All results 
confirmed that AE and EMD could inhibit metastasis of breast cancer cells 
through different pathways. Our study provides an overall view of the underlying 
mechanisms of AE and EMD against breast cancer metastasis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232213738
PMCID: PMC9694700
PMID: 36430215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.