1. Eur Respir Rev. 2022 Nov 29;31(166):220114. doi: 10.1183/16000617.0114-2022. 
Print 2022 Dec 31.

Pulmonary aspergillosis: diagnosis and treatment.

Lamoth F(1)(2), Calandra T(3).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases Service, Department of Medicine, Lausanne University 
Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland 
Frederic.Lamoth@chuv.ch.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne University Hospital and University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Infectious Diseases Service, Department of Medicine, Lausanne University 
Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0150-2022.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0212-2021.
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0051-2022.
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0092-2022.
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0068-2022.
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0104-2022.
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0093-2022.

Aspergillus species are the most frequent cause of fungal infections of the 
lungs with a broad spectrum of clinical presentations including invasive 
pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA) and chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA). IPA 
affects immunocompromised populations, which are increasing in number and 
diversity with the advent of novel anti-cancer therapies. Moreover, IPA has 
emerged as a complication of severe influenza and coronavirus disease 2019 in 
apparently immunocompetent hosts. CPA mainly affects patients with pre-existing 
lung lesions and is recognised increasingly frequently among patients with 
long-term survival following cure of tuberculosis or lung cancer. The diagnosis 
of pulmonary aspergillosis is complex as it relies on the presence of clinical, 
radiological and microbiological criteria, which differ according to the type of 
pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA or CPA) and the type of patient population. The 
management of pulmonary aspergillosis is complicated by the limited number of 
treatment options, drug interactions, adverse events and the emergence of 
antifungal resistance.

Copyright Â©The authors 2022.

DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0114-2022
PMCID: PMC9724826
PMID: 36450372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: F. Lamoth has research 
funding from Gilead, MSD, Pfizer and Novartis, and has participated in Advisory 
boards for Gilead, MSD and Pfizer. All contracts were made with and fees paid to 
his institution (CHUV). Conflict of interest: T. Calandra has participated in 
advisory boards or consulted for Menarini, Shinogi, Cytosorbent, ThermoFisher 
and GE Healthcare for projects unrelated to the submitted work and on data 
safety monitoring boards for Cidara and Novartis. All contracts were made with 
and fees paid to his institution (CHUV).