1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 Nov 14;9:976980. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.976980. 
eCollection 2022.

Female rats have a different healing phenotype than males after anterior 
cruciate ligament rupture with no intervention.

Morris JL(1), Letson HL(1), Biros E(1), McEwen PC(2), Dobson GP(1).

Author information:
(1)Heart and Trauma Research Laboratory, College of Medicine and Dentistry, 
James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, Australia.
(2)Orthopaedic Research Institute of Queensland, Townsville, QLD, Australia.

Little is known on the sex-specific healing responses after an anterior cruciate 
ligament (ACL) rupture. To address this, we compared male and female 
Sprague-Dawley rats following non-surgical ACL rupture. Hematology, 
inflammation, joint swelling, range of motion, and pain-sensitivity were 
analyzed at various times over 31-days. Healing was assessed by histopathology 
and gene expression changes in the ACL remnant and adjacent joint tissues. In 
the first few days, males and females showed similar functional responses after 
rupture, despite contrasting hematology and systemic inflammatory profiles. 
Sex-specific differences were found in inflammatory, immune and angiogenic 
potential in the synovial fluid. Histopathology and increased collagen and 
fibronectin gene expression revealed significant tissue remodeling in both 
sexes. In the ACL remnant, however, Acta2 gene expression (α-SMA production) was 
4-fold higher in males, with no change in females, indicating increased 
fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition with higher contractile elements 
(stiffness) in males. Females had 80% lower Pparg expression, which further 
suggests reduced cellular differentiation potential in females than males. Sex 
differences were also apparent in the infrapatellar fat pad and articular 
cartilage. We conclude females and males showed different patterns of healing 
post-ACL rupture over 31-days, which may impact timing of reconstruction 
surgery, and possibly clinical outcome.

Copyright © 2022 Morris, Letson, Biros, McEwen and Dobson.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.976980
PMCID: PMC9701729
PMID: 36452896

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.