1. Anal Chem. 2022 Dec 13;94(49):17151-17159. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.2c03563. 
Epub 2022 Dec 2.

Rapid and Sensitive Genotyping of SARS-CoV-2 Key Mutation L452R with an 
RPA-PfAgo Method.

Zhao C(1), Yang L(1), Zhang X(1), Tang Y(1), Wang Y(1), Shao X(1), Gao S(1), Liu 
X(2), Wang P(3).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Marine Biological Resources and Environment, 
Co-Innovation Center of Jiangsu Marine Bio-industry Technology, Jiangsu Key 
Laboratory of Marine Pharmaceutical Compound Screening, School of Pharmacy, 
Jiangsu Ocean University, Lianyungang 222005, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Ministry of Education, College of 
Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan 430074, China.
(3)School of Food Science and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Nanjing Normal 
University, Nanjing 210023, China.

In the two years of COVID-19 pandemic, the SARS-CoV-2 variants have caused waves 
of infections one after another, and the pandemic is not ending. The key 
mutations on the S protein enable the variants with enhanced viral infectivity, 
immune evasion, and/or antibody neutralization resistance, bringing difficulties 
to epidemic prevention and control. In support of precise epidemic control and 
precision medicine of the virus, a fast and simple genotyping method for the key 
mutations of SARS-CoV-2 variants needs to be developed. By utilizing the 
specific recognition and cleavage property of the nuclease Argonaute from 
Pyrococcus furiosus (PfAgo), we developed a recombinase polymerase amplification 
(RPA) and PfAgo combined method for a rapid and sensitive genotyping of 
SARS-CoV-2 key mutation L452R. With a delicate design of the strategy, careful 
screening of the RPA primers and PfAgo gDNA, and optimization of the reaction, 
the method achieves a high sensitivity of a single copy per reaction, which is 
validated with the pseudovirus. This is the highest sensitivity that can be 
achieved theoretically and the highest sensitivity as compared to the available 
SARS-CoV-2 genotyping assays. Using RPA, the procedure of the method is finished 
within 1.5 h and only needs a minimum laboratorial support, suggesting that the 
method can be easily applied locally or on-site. The RPA-PfAgo method 
established in this study provides a strong support to the precise epidemic 
control and precision medicine of SARS-CoV-2 variants and can be readily 
developed for the simultaneous genotyping of multiple SARS-CoV-2 mutations.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.2c03563
PMID: 36459151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]