1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2023 Feb;208:115370. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2022.115370. Epub 
2022 Dec 5.

Counter-regulatory renin-angiotensin system in hypertension: Review and update 
in the era of COVID-19 pandemic.

Chen H(1), Peng J(2), Wang T(2), Wen J(2), Chen S(2), Huang Y(3), Zhang Y(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health (Shenzhen), Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518000, 
Guangdong, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene 
Regulation, Guangdong-Hong Kong Joint Laboratory for RNA Medicine, Medical 
Research Center, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou 510120, Guangdong, China; Nanhai Translational Innovation Center of 
Precision Immunology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Foshan 528200, Guangdong, 
China.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China. Electronic address: yu.huang@cityu.edu.hk.
(4)School of Public Health (Shenzhen), Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518000, 
Guangdong, China. Electronic address: zhangy2293@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Cardiovascular disease is the major cause of mortality and disability, with 
hypertension being the most prevalent risk factor. Excessive activation of the 
renin-angiotensin system (RAS) under pathological conditions, leading to 
vascular remodeling and inflammation, is closely related to cardiovascular 
dysfunction. The counter-regulatory axis of the RAS consists of 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), angiotensin (1-7), angiotensin (1-9), 
alamandine, proto-oncogene Mas receptor, angiotensin II type-2 receptor and 
Mas-related G protein-coupled receptor member D. Each of these components has 
been shown to counteract the effects of the overactivated RAS. In this review, 
we summarize the latest insights into the complexity and interplay of the 
counter-regulatory RAS axis in hypertension, highlight the pathophysiological 
functions of ACE2, a multifunctional molecule linking hypertension and COVID-19, 
and discuss the function and therapeutic potential of targeting this 
counter-regulatory RAS axis to prevent and treat hypertension in the context of 
the current COVID-19 pandemic.

Copyright Â© 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2022.115370
PMCID: PMC9721294
PMID: 36481346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.