1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Nov 30;23(23):15041. doi: 10.3390/ijms232315041.

Optogenetic Therapy for Visual Restoration.

Sakai D(1)(2)(3), Tomita H(4), Maeda A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kobe City Eye Hospital, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Kobe City Medical Center General Hospital, Kobe 
650-0047, Japan.
(3)Department of Surgery, Division of Ophthalmology, Kobe University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.
(4)Graduate Course in Biological Sciences, Division of Science and Engineering, 
Iwate University, Iwate 020-8550, Japan.

Optogenetics is a recent breakthrough in neuroscience, and one of the most 
promising applications is the treatment of retinal degenerative diseases. 
Multiple clinical trials are currently ongoing, less than a decade after the 
first attempt at visual restoration using optogenetics. Optogenetic therapy has 
great value in providing hope for visual restoration in late-stage retinal 
degeneration, regardless of the genotype. This alternative gene therapy consists 
of multiple elements including the choice of target retinal cells, optogenetic 
tools, and gene delivery systems. Currently, there are various options for each 
element, all of which have been developed as a product of technological success. 
In particular, the performance of optogenetic tools in terms of light and 
wavelength sensitivity have been improved by engineering microbial opsins and 
applying human opsins. To provide better post-treatment vision, the optimal 
choice of optogenetic tools and effective gene delivery to retinal cells is 
necessary. In this review, we provide an overview of the advancements in 
optogenetic therapy for visual restoration, focusing on available options for 
optogenetic tools and gene delivery methods.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232315041
PMCID: PMC9735806
PMID: 36499371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.