1. Cell Biosci. 2022 Dec 15;12(1):200. doi: 10.1186/s13578-022-00941-0.

Distinct mechanisms mediating therapy-induced cellular senescence in prostate 
cancer.

Kallenbach J(#)(1), Atri Roozbahani G(#)(1), Heidari Horestani M(#)(1), 
Baniahmad A(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller 
University, Am Klinikum 1, 07740, Jena, Germany.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller 
University, Am Klinikum 1, 07740, Jena, Germany. aria.baniahmad@med.uni-jena.de.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (PCa) is an age-related malignancy in men with a 
high incidence rate. PCa treatments face many obstacles due to cancer cell 
resistance and many bypassing mechanisms to escape therapy. According to the 
intricacy of PCa, many standard therapies are being used depending on PCa stages 
including radical prostatectomy, radiation therapy, androgen receptor (AR) 
targeted therapy (androgen deprivation therapy, supraphysiological androgen, and 
AR antagonists) and chemotherapy. Most of the aforementioned therapies have been 
implicated to induce cellular senescence. Cellular senescence is defined as a 
stable cell cycle arrest in the G1 phase and is one of the mechanisms that 
prevent cancer proliferation.
RESULTS: In this review, we provide and analyze different mechanisms of 
therapy-induced senescence (TIS) in PCa and their effects on the tumor. 
Interestingly, it seems that different molecular pathways are used by cancer 
cells for TIS. Understanding the complexity and underlying mechanisms of 
cellular senescence is very critical due to its role in tumorigenesis. The most 
prevalent analyzed pathways in PCa as TIS are the p53/p21WAF1/CIP1, the 
p15INK4B/p16INK4A/pRb/E2F/Cyclin D, the ROS/ERK, p27Kip1/CDK/pRb, and the 
p27Kip1/Skp2/C/EBP β signaling. Despite growth inhibition, senescent cells are 
highly metabolically active. In addition, their secretome, which is termed 
senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP), affects within the tumor 
microenvironment neighboring non-tumor and tumor cells and thereby may regulate 
the growth of tumors. Induction of cancer cell senescence is therefore a 
double-edged sword that can lead to reduced or enhanced tumor growth.
CONCLUSION: Thus, dependent on the type of senescence inducer and the specific 
senescence-induced cellular pathway, it is useful to develop pathway-specific 
senolytic compounds to specifically targeting senescent cells in order to evict 
senescent cells and thereby to reduce SASP side effects.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13578-022-00941-0
PMCID: PMC9753376
PMID: 36522745

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.