1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Nov 29;9:1018048. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.1018048. 
eCollection 2022.

Association of admission serum calcium level with left ventricular dysfunction 
in patients with acute coronary syndrome.

Wang H(1), Wang R(2)(3), Tian J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Aerospace Center Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Aerospace Center Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital 
Medical University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The relationship between serum calcium and left ventricular function 
in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) has not been explored. Our aim 
was to investigate the correlation of admission serum calcium with left 
ventricular dysfunction in ACS patients.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional study, 658 ACS patients who were admitted in 
the Department of Cardiovascular Disease from June 1st, 2019 to December 31st, 
2019 were enrolled in the present study. Serum calcium and B-type natriuretic 
peptide (BNP) were measured at admission. Left ventricular ejection fraction 
(LVEF) was assessed using echocardiography. The correlation between admission 
serum calcium and left ventricular dysfunction was analyzed.
RESULTS: When stratified by serum calcium quartiles calculated from all 
patients, patients with lower serum calcium quartile showed a markedly higher 
BNP and lower LVEF (P < 0.05). Patients with LVEF ≤ 50% showed a significantly 
lower serum calcium and higher BNP compared to those with LVEF> 50% (P < 0.05). 
Admission serum calcium was positively correlated with LVEF (P < 0.01) but 
negatively correlated with BNP (P < 0.01). Multivariate logistic regression 
analysis showed that lower serum calcium (adjusted OR: 0.720, 95% CI: 
0.519-0.997, P = 0.048) was independently associated with BNP ≥ 300 pg/ml in ACS 
patients. Using LVEF as a dependent variable, no significant correlation between 
low serum calcium and left ventricular systolic dysfunction was found in ACS 
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with ACS, admission serum calcium was positively 
correlated with LVEF and negatively with BNP. Lower admission serum calcium was 
an independent risk factor for elevated BNP.

Copyright © 2022 Wang, Wang and Tian.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.1018048
PMCID: PMC9746684
PMID: 36523366

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.