1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Nov 29;10:1069064. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.1069064. 
eCollection 2022.

Cyclins and CDKs in the regulation of meiosis-specific events.

Palacios-Blanco I(1), Martín-Castellanos C(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biología Funcional y Genómica (IBFG), CSIC-USAL, Salamanca, 
Spain.

How eukaryotic cells control their duplication is a fascinating example of how a 
biological system self-organizes specific activities to temporally order 
cellular events. During cell cycle progression, the cellular level of CDK 
(Cyclin-Dependent Kinase) activity temporally orders the different cell cycle 
phases, ensuring that DNA replication occurs prior to segregation into two 
daughter cells. CDK activity requires the binding of a regulatory subunit 
(cyclin) to the core kinase, and both CDKs and cyclins are well conserved 
throughout evolution from yeast to humans. As key regulators, they coordinate 
cell cycle progression with metabolism, DNA damage, and cell differentiation. In 
meiosis, the special cell division that ensures the transmission of genetic 
information from one generation to the next, cyclins and CDKs have acquired 
novel functions to coordinate meiosis-specific events such as chromosome 
architecture, recombination, and synapsis. Interestingly, meiosis-specific 
cyclins and CDKs are common in evolution, some cyclins seem to have evolved to 
acquire CDK-independent functions, and even some CDKs associate with a 
non-cyclin partner. We will review the functions of these key regulators in 
meiosis where variation has specially flourished.

Copyright © 2022 Palacios-Blanco and Martín-Castellanos.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.1069064
PMCID: PMC9745066
PMID: 36523509

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.