1. Front Immunol. 2022 Nov 30;13:1041098. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1041098. 
eCollection 2022.

Krebs von den lungen-6 as a clinical marker for hypersensitivity pneumonitis: A 
meta-analysis and bioinformatics analysis.

He J(1)(2), Zhang J(1)(2), Ren X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Medical College of Chengdu Medical College. Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

AIM: Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), also referred to as exogenous allergic 
alveolitis, is one of the most common interstitial lung diseases (ILDs). A 
potential immune biomarker, Krebs von den lgen-6 (KL-6) characterizes the 
progression and severity of HP. The meta-analysis in this study was conducted to 
elucidate the variations in the concentrations of KL-6 in different types of HP.
METHODS: A systematic search of various databases such as EMBASE, Pubmed, CNKI, 
VIP, Web of Science, and WanFang was carried out to find relevant published 
articles between January 1980 and August 2022 that explored the relationship 
between KL-6 and allergic pneumonia. Standardized mean difference (SMD) and 95% 
confidence interval (CI) were used as effect sizes for comparison among 
different groups. The GSE47460 and GSE150910 datasets were downloaded to extract 
and validate the differences in KL-6 mRNA expression between HP lung tissue and 
healthy controls. Furthermore, the single-cell sequencing dataset GSE135893 was 
downloaded to extract KL-6 mRNA expression in type II alveolar epithelial cells 
to validate the differences between HP and healthy controls. Two researchers 
evaluated the quality of the included studies by employing Newcastle-Ottawa 
Scale. All the qualified studies were subjected to statistical analyses carried 
out utilizing RevMan 5.2, Stata 11.0, and R software 4.1.3.
RESULTS: Twenty studies aligned perfectly with the inclusion criteria of the 
meta. The concentrations of KL-6 were substantially higher in the blood of HP 
patients as compared to the control group. Subgroup analyses were carried out in 
accordance with the allergen source and the results revealed that patients with 
different allergens had higher blood KL-6 concentrations than healthy controls. 
Additionally, different subgroups of subjects were created for meta-analysis as 
per the fibrosis status, race, measurement method, and sample type. The 
concentration of KL-6 in blood was much higher in all HP subgroups than in 
healthy control groups. Moreover, the bioinformatics analysis revealed that KL-6 
mRNA expression was higher in HP lung tissue and type II alveolar epithelial 
cells as compared to healthy controls.
CONCLUSION: The present meta-analysis and bioinformatics analysis suggested that 
the concentration levels of KL-6 varied between HP patients and healthy 
individuals, and the KL-6 concentrations may be higher in the blood samples of 
HP patients.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/, 
CRD42022355334.

Copyright Â© 2022 He, Zhang and Ren.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1041098
PMCID: PMC9748086
PMID: 36532009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.