1. Trop Life Sci Res. 2022 Sep;33(3):129-149. doi: 10.21315/tlsr2022.33.3.8. Epub
 2022 Sep 30.

Effect of Spent Mushroom Compost of Pleurotus eous Strain P-31 on Growth 
Performance and Nodulation of Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata Walp.).

Michael WK(1), Tawia OG(1), Korley KN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Environmental Biology, University of Ghana, P.O. Box 
55, Legon, Accra, Ghana.
(2)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, School of Allied Health Sciences, 
University of Health and Allied Sciences, PMB 31, Ho, Ghana.

This study investigated the influence of spent mushroom compost (SMC) of 
Pleurotus eous strain P-31 on the growth, development and soil rhizobial 
population associated with nodulation of cowpea (Vigna unguiculata Walp.) 
black-eye variety, under greenhouse conditions at 28 ± 2ºC for 12 weeks. Sandy 
loam soil was combined with different percentages of SMC to obtain the following 
combinations (0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 100%). Lower concentrations, SMC 
(5%-25%) promoted plant height, number of leaves, total leaf area, total 
chlorophyll, chlorophyll a and b as well as dry matter accumulation of shoot and 
roots after 12 weeks at 28°C-32°C. Soil: SMC concentrations beyond 30% SMC 
variably depressed the various developmental criteria used in assessing growth. 
The trend obtained in the assessed parameter were statistically significant (p ≤ 
0.05) in decreasing order: 5% SMC < 10% SMC < 15% SMC, < 20% SMC, < 25% SMC, < 
30% SMC, < 100% SMC. The cowpea plant efficiently assimilated nitrogen (N2) from 
the soil: compost. Nodule formation by cowpea was commensurate with increasing 
percentage of spent compost was highest in 5% SMC (89/plant) and declined with 
increasing proportion of SMC: soil mixture up to 25% but nodulation of cowpea 
plant was completely depressed in the absence of soil (100% SMC) pots. The 
Nodule Index data showed that the best nodule size and weight were formed by 
cowpea growing in medium containing 5% SMC (18) and 10% SMC (12) and thereafter 
declined. The nodules were red to pinkish in colour epitomising leghaemoglobin 
which could initiate nodulation and N2 fixation in soil. This study has shown 
that 5% SMC-20% SMC could provide favourable conditions in soil as a 
biofertiliser to improve the growth, development and nodulation of cowpea.

© Penerbit Universiti Sains Malaysia, 2022.

DOI: 10.21315/tlsr2022.33.3.8
PMCID: PMC9747103
PMID: 36545055