1. PLoS One. 2022 Dec 21;17(12):e0272675. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0272675. 
eCollection 2022.

Significance of two transmembrane ion gradients for human erythrocyte volume 
stabilization.

Ataullakhanov FI(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Martinov MV(1), Shi Q(6)(7), Vitvitsky VM(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Theoretical Problems of Physico-Chemical Pharmacology, RAS, 
Moscow, Russia.
(2)M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia.
(3)Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow Region, Dolgoprudny, 
Russia.
(4)Dmitry Rogachev National Medical Research Center for Pediatric Hematology, 
Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russia.
(5)University of Pennsylvania (UPENN), Philadelphia, PA, United States of 
America.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Changchun Institute of 
Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, Jilin, China.
(7)University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China.

Functional effectiveness of erythrocytes depends on their high deformability 
that allows them to pass through narrow tissue capillaries. The erythrocytes can 
deform easily due to discoid shape provided by the stabilization of an optimal 
cell volume at a given cell surface area. We used mathematical simulation to 
study the role of transport Na/K-ATPase and transmembrane Na+ and K+ gradients 
in human erythrocyte volume stabilization at non-selective increase in cell 
membrane permeability to cations. The model included Na/K-ATPase activated by 
intracellular Na+, Na+ and K+ transmembrane gradients, and took into account 
contribution of glycolytic metabolites and adenine nucleotides to cytoplasm 
osmotic pressure. We found that this model provides the best stabilization of 
the erythrocyte volume at non-selective increase in the permeability of the cell 
membrane, which can be caused by an oxidation of the membrane components or 
mechanical stress during circulation. The volume of the erythrocyte deviates 
from the optimal value by no more than 10% with a change in the non-selective 
permeability of the cell membrane to cations from 50 to 200% of the normal 
value. If only one transmembrane ion gradient is present (Na+), the cell loses 
the ability to stabilize volume and even small changes in membrane permeability 
cause dramatic changes in the cell volume. Our results reveal that the presence 
of two oppositely directed transmembrane ion gradients is fundamentally 
important for robust stabilization of cellular volume in human erythrocytes.

Copyright: Â© 2022 Ataullakhanov et al. This is an open access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which 
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided 
the original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0272675
PMCID: PMC9770400
PMID: 36542609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.