1. RSC Adv. 2022 Nov 30;12(53):34359-34368. doi: 10.1039/d2ra06694g. eCollection 
2022 Nov 29.

Dynamic and thermodynamic impact of L94A, W100A, and W100L mutations on the D2 
dopamine receptor bound to risperidone.

Azam F(1), Bello M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, Unaizah College of 
Pharmacy, Qassim University Unaizah 51911 Saudi Arabia.
(2)Laboratorio de Diseño y Desarrollo de Nuevos Fármacos e Innovación 
Biotecnológica, Escuela Superior de Medicina, Instituto Politécnico Nacional 
Plan de San Luis y Diaz Mirón, S/N, Col. Casco de Santo Tomas Ciudad de México 
11340 Mexico bellomartini@gmail.com mbellor@ipn.mx.

DRD2 is an important receptor in the mediation of antipsychotic drugs but also 
in Parkinson medication, hyperprolactinemia, nausea and vomiting. Recently, 
crystallographic studies of the DRD2-risperidone complex have provided important 
information about risperidone recognition in wild-type and different stabilizing 
DRD2-risperidone residues. Using the crystallographic structure of the 
DRD2-risperidone complex as a starting point, we undertook molecular dynamics 
(MD) simulations to investigate the structural and thermodynamic basis of 
molecular recognition by risperidone at the ligand-binding sites of wild-type 
and mutant DRD2. A solvated phospholipid bilayer was used to construct 
DRD2-risperidone complexes, which were then subjected to several microsecond 
(μs) MD simulations in order to obtain realistic receptor-ligand conformations 
under the equilibrated simulation time. Risperidone had a higher affinity for 
wild-type and L94A mutant DRD2 than the W100L and W100A mutants, according to 
binding free energy calculations using the Molecular Mechanics Generalized-Born 
Surface Area (MMGBSA) method, explaining the experimental differences in ligand 
residence times. Principal component (PC) analysis revealed important 
conformational mobility upon molecular recognition of risperidone for the L94A 
mutant compared to the wild type, indicating an unfavorable entropic component 
that may contribute to improving risperidone affinity in the L94A DRD2 mutant.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d2ra06694g
PMCID: PMC9709807
PMID: 36545576

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare they have no conflict of 
interest in terms of the content of this manuscript.