1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2022 Dec 14;11(12):2460. doi: 10.3390/antiox11122460.

Maqui Berry and Ginseng Extracts Reduce Cigarette Smoke-Induced Cell Injury in a 
3D Bone Co-Culture Model.

Guo H(1)(2), Weng W(1), Zhang S(2), Rinderknecht H(1), Braun B(1), Breinbauer 
R(1), Gupta P(3), Kumar A(3)(4)(5), Ehnert S(1), Histing T(1), Nussler AK(1), 
Aspera-Werz RH(1).

Author information:
(1)BG Trauma Center Tübingen, Siegfried Weller Research Institute, Department of 
Trauma and Reconstructive Surgery, University of Tübingen, Schnarrenbergstr. 95, 
D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Spine Surgery Department, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou 
University of Chinese Medicine, 12 Airport Road, Guangzhou 510405, China.
(3)Biomaterial and Tissue Engineering Group, Department of Biological Sciences 
and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India.
(4)Centre for Nanosciences, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
208016, India.
(5)Centre for Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India.

Cigarette smoking-induced oxidative stress has harmful effects on bone 
metabolism. Maqui berry extract (MBE) and ginseng extract (GE) are two naturally 
occurring antioxidants that have been shown to reduce oxidative stress. By using 
an osteoblast and osteoclast three-dimensional co-culture system, we 
investigated the effects of MBE and GE on bone cells exposed to cigarette smoke 
extract (CSE). The cell viability and function of the co-culture system were 
measured on day 14. Markers of bone cell differentiation and oxidative stress 
were evaluated at gene and protein levels on day 7. The results showed that 
exposure to CSE induced osteoporotic-like alterations in the co-culture system, 
while 1.5 µg/mL MBE and 50 µg/mL GE improved CSE-impaired osteoblast function 
and decreased CSE-induced osteoclast function. The molecular mechanism of MBE 
and GE in preventing CSE-induced bone cell damage is linked with the inhibition 
of the NF-κB signaling pathway and the activation of the Nrf2 signaling pathway. 
Therefore, MBE and GE can reduce CSE-induced detrimental effects on bone cells 
and, thus, prevent smoking-induced alterations in bone cell homeostasis. These 
two antioxidants are thus suitable supplements to support bone regeneration in 
smokers.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox11122460
PMCID: PMC9774157
PMID: 36552669

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.