1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2022 Nov 25;15(12):1467. doi: 10.3390/ph15121467.

Introduction of a SiFA Moiety into the D-Glutamate Chain of DOTA-PP-F11N Results 
in Radiohybrid-Based CCK-2R-Targeted Compounds with Improved Pharmacokinetics In 
Vivo.

Holzleitner N(1), Günther T(1), Beck R(1), Lapa C(2), Wester HJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Radiochemistry, Technical University of Munich, 85748 
Garching, Germany.
(2)Nuclear Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Augsburg, 86156 
Augsburg, Germany.

In order to enable 18F- and 177Lu-labelling within the same molecule, we 
introduced a silicon-based fluoride acceptor (SiFA) into the hexa-D-glutamate 
chain of DOTA-PP-F11N. In addition, minigastrin analogues with a prolonged as 
well as γ-linked D-glutamate chain were synthesised and evaluated. CCK-2R 
affinity (IC50, AR42J cells) and lipophilicity (logD7.4) were determined. 
Biodistribution studies at 24 h post-injection (p.i.) and µSPECT/CT imaging at 
1, 4 and 24 h p.i. were carried out in AR42J tumour-bearing CB17-SCID mice. 
CCK-2R affinity of (R)-DOTAGA-rhCCK-1 to 18 was enhanced with increasing 
distance between the SiFA building block and the binding motif. Lipophilicity of 
[177Lu]Lu-(R)-DOTAGA-rhCCK-1 to 18 was higher compared to that of 
[177Lu]Lu-DOTA-PP-F11N and [177Lu]Lu-CP04. The respective α- and γ-linked rhCCK 
derivatives revealing the highest CCK-2R affinity were further evaluated in 
vivo. In comparison with [177Lu]Lu-DOTA-PP-F11N, [177Lu-]Lu-(R)-DOTAGA-rhCCK-9 
and -16 exhibited three- to eight-fold increased activity levels in the tumour 
at 24 h p.i. However, activity levels in the kidneys were elevated as well. We 
could show that the introduction of a lipophilic SiFA moiety into the 
hydrophilic backbone of [177Lu]Lu-DOTA-PP-F11N led to a decelerated blood 
clearance and thus improved tumour retention. However, elevated kidney retention 
has to be addressed in future studies.

DOI: 10.3390/ph15121467
PMCID: PMC9783573
PMID: 36558917

Conflict of interest statement: H.J.-W. is founder and shareholder of Scintomics 
GmbH, Munich, Germany. No other potential conflicts of interest relevant to this 
article exist.