1. Biomedicines. 2022 Dec 10;10(12):3206. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10123206.

Zinc in Prostate Health and Disease: A Mini Review.

Karunasinghe N(1).

Author information:
(1)Auckland Cancer Society Research Centre, Faculty of Medical and Health 
Sciences, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand.

Introduction-With the high global prevalence of prostate cancer and associated 
mortalities, it is important to enhance current clinical practices for better 
prostate cancer outcomes. The current review is towards understanding the value 
of Zn towards this mission. Method-General information on Zn in biology and 
multiple aspects of Zn involvement in prostate health and disease were referred 
to in PubMed. Results-The most influential feature of Zn towards prostate health 
is its ability to retain sufficient citrate levels for a healthy prostate. Zn 
deficiencies were recorded in serum, hair, and prostate tissue of men with 
prostate cancer compared to non-cancer controls. Zn gut absorption, albumin 
binding, and storage compete with various factors. There are multiple 
associations of Zn cellular influx and efflux transporters, Zn finger proteins, 
matrix metalloproteinases, and Zn signaling with prostate cancer outcomes. Such 
Zn marker variations associated with prostate cancer recorded from biological 
matrices may improve algorithms for prostate cancer screening, prognosis, and 
management when coupled with standard clinical practices. Discussion-The 
influence of Zn in prostatic health and disease is multidimensional, therefore 
more personalized Zn requirements may be beneficial. Several opportunities exist 
to utilize and improve understanding of Zn associations with prostate health and 
disease.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10123206
PMCID: PMC9775643
PMID: 36551962

Conflict of interest statement: The author declare no conflict of interest.