1. Pathogens. 2022 Dec 6;11(12):1480. doi: 10.3390/pathogens11121480.

Isolation and Characterization of Chi-like Salmonella Bacteriophages Infecting 
Two Salmonella enterica Serovars, Typhimurium and Enteritidis.

Teklemariam AD(1), Alharbi MG(1), Al-Hindi RR(1), Alotibi I(2), Aljaddawi AA(1), 
Azhari SA(1), Esmael A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Health Information Technology Department, Applied College, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Botany and Microbiology Department, Faculty of Science, Benha University, 
Benha 13518, Egypt.
(4)Nebraska Center for Virology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 
68583, USA.

Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium and Salmonella enterica Serovar 
Enteritidis are well-known pathogens that cause foodborne diseases in humans. 
The emergence of antibiotic-resistant Salmonella serovars has caused serious 
public health problems worldwide. In this study, two lysogenic phages, STP11 and 
SEP13, were isolated from a wastewater treatment plant in Jeddah, KSA. 
Transmission electron microscopic images revealed that both phages are new 
members of the genus “Chivirus” within the family Siphoviridae. Both STP11 and 
SEP13 had a lysis time of 90 min with burst sizes of 176 and 170 PFU/cell, 
respectively. The two phages were thermostable (0 °C ≤ temperature < 70 °C) and 
pH tolerant at 3 ≤ pH < 11. STP11 showed lytic activity for approximately 42.8% 
(n = 6), while SEP13 showed against 35.7% (n = 5) of the tested bacterial 
strains. STP11 and STP13 have linear dsDNA genomes consisting of 58,890 bp and 
58,893 bp nucleotide sequences with G + C contents of 57% and 56.5%, 
respectively. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the genomes of phages STP11 
and SEP13 contained 70 and 71 ORFs, respectively. No gene encoding tRNA was 
detected in their genome. Of the 70 putative ORFs of phage STP11, 27 (38.6%) 
were assigned to functional genes and 43 (61.4%) were annotated as hypothetical 
proteins. Similarly, 29 (40.8%) of the 71 putative ORFs of phage SEP13 were 
annotated as functional genes, whereas the remaining 42 (59.2%) were assigned as 
nonfunctional proteins. Phylogenetic analysis of the whole genome sequence 
demonstrated that the isolated phages are closely related to Chi-like Salmonella 
viruses.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens11121480
PMCID: PMC9783114
PMID: 36558814

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.