1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Nov 26;13(12):2218. doi: 10.3390/genes13122218.

Assessment of Rare Genetic Variants to Identify Candidate Modifier Genes 
Underlying Neurological Manifestations in Neurofibromatosis 1 Patients.

Tang J(1), Li N(1), Li G(1), Wang J(1), Yu T(1), Yao R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Shanghai 
Children's Medical Center, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai 200127, China.

Neurological phenotypes such as intellectual disability occur in almost half of 
patients with neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1). Current genotype-phenotype studies have 
failed to reveal the mechanism underlying this clinical variability. Despite the 
presence of pathogenic variants of NF1, modifier genes likely determine the 
occurrence and severity of neurological phenotypes. Exome sequencing data were 
used to identify genetic variants in 13 NF1 patients and 457 healthy controls, 
and this information was used to identify candidate modifier genes underlying 
neurological phenotypes based on an optimal sequence kernel association test. 
Thirty-six genes were identified as significant modifying factors in patients 
with neurological phenotypes and all are highly expressed in the nervous system. 
A review of the literature confirmed that 19 genes including CUL7, DPH1, and 
BCO1 are clearly associated with the alteration of neurological functioning and 
development. Our study revealed the enrichment of rare variants of 19 genes 
closely related to neurological development and functioning in NF1 patients with 
neurological phenotypes, indicating possible modifier genes and variants 
affecting neurodevelopment. Further studies on rare genetic variants of 
candidate modifier genes may help explain the clinical heterogeneity of NF1.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13122218
PMCID: PMC9778305
PMID: 36553485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.