1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Jan 3;120(1):e2214123120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2214123120. Epub 2022 Dec 27.

NADP(H)-dependent biocatalysis without adding NADP(H).

Herold RA(1), Reinbold R(2), Schofield CJ(2), Armstrong FA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QR, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Chemistry and the Ineos Oxford Institute for Antimicrobial 
Research, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QY, United Kingdom.

Isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) naturally copurifies and crystallizes in a 
resting state with a molecule of its exchangeable cofactor, NADP+/NADPH, bound 
in each monomer of the homodimer. We report electrochemical studies with IDH1 
that exploit this property to reveal the massive advantage of nanoconfinement to 
increase the efficiency of multistep enzyme-catalyzed cascade reactions. When 
coloaded with ferredoxin NADP+ reductase in a nanoporous conducting indium tin 
oxide film, IDH1 carries out the complete electrochemical oxidation of 6 mM 
isocitrate (in 4mL) to 2-oxoglutarate (2OG), using only the NADP(H) that 
copurified with IDH1 and was carried into the electrode pores as cargo-the 
system remains active for days. The entrapped cofactor, now quantifiable by 
cyclic voltammetry, undergoes ~160,000 turnovers during the process. The results 
from a variety of electrocatalysis experiments imply that the local 
concentrations of the two nanoconfined enzymes lie around the millimolar range. 
The combination of crowding and entrapment results in a 102 to 103-fold increase 
in the efficiency of NADP(H) redox cycling. The ability of the method to drive 
cascade catalysis in either direction (oxidation or reduction) and remove and 
replace substrates was exploited to study redox-state dependent differences in 
cofactor binding between wild-type IDH1 and the cancer-linked R132H variant that 
catalyzes the "gain of function" reduction of 2OG to 2-hydroxyglutarate instead 
of isocitrate oxidation. The combined results demonstrate the power of 
nanoconfinement for facilitating multistep enzyme catalysis (in this case 
energized and verified electrochemically) and reveal insights into the dynamic 
role of nicotinamide cofactors as redox (hydride) carriers.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2214123120
PMCID: PMC9910440
PMID: 36574703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.