1. Front Neurol. 2022 Dec 9;13:1090406. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1090406. 
eCollection 2022.

UQCRC1 variants in early-onset and familial Parkinson's disease in a Taiwanese 
cohort.

Liao TW(1), Chao CY(1), Wu YR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, 
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: A recent Taiwanese study reported variants of the 
ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase core protein 1 (UQCRC1) gene linked to 
autosomal dominant parkinsonism with polyneuropathy. This study investigated the 
pathogenicity of UQCRC1 in a Taiwanese cohort of patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD).
METHOD: This study involved 107 participants (98 with early-onset PD and nine 
with familial PD). All UQCRC1 coding exons and exon-intron boundaries were 
sequenced. The rarity and pathogenicity of the identified variants were 
analyzed. The carrier frequencies of our cohort and the Taiwan Biobank were 
compared through a Pearson's χ2 or Fisher's exact test along with Bonferroni 
corrections.
RESULTS: Three missense variants (c.643G > C, p.D215H; c.800C > G, p.P267R, and 
c.923A > G, p.N308S) and seven rare variants were identified. No significant 
differences in the missense-variant carrier frequency were noted between our 
cohort and individuals in the Taiwan Biobank. Furthermore, no significant 
associations were noted between the variants and the risk of PD.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study is not supporting a role of UQCRC1 variants in PD.

Copyright © 2022 Liao, Chao and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1090406
PMCID: PMC9780373
PMID: 36570444

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.