1. Kidney Int. 2023 Mar;103(3):607-615. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2022.11.025. Epub
2022  Dec 24.

Individuals heterozygous for ALG8 protein-truncating variants are at increased 
risk of a mild cystic kidney disease.

Apple B(1), Sartori G(2), Moore B(3), Chintam K(4), Singh G(5), Anand PM(6), 
Strande NT(7), Mirshahi T(3), Triffo W(2), Chang AR(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine, Scranton, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Geisinger, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Genomic Health, Geisinger, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Geisinger, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Nephrology, Geisinger, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA; Center for 
Kidney Health Research, Department of Population Health Sciences, Geisinger, 
Danville, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Department of Nephrology, Medical University of South Carolina, Lancaster, 
South Carolina, USA.
(7)Department of Genomic Health, Geisinger, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA; Autism 
and Developmental Medicine Institute, Geisinger, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA.
(8)Department of Nephrology, Geisinger, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA; Center for 
Kidney Health Research, Department of Population Health Sciences, Geisinger, 
Danville, Pennsylvania, USA. Electronic address: achang@geisinger.edu.

ALG8 protein-truncating variants (PTVs) have previously been described in 
patients with polycystic liver disease and in some cases cystic kidney disease. 
Given a lack of well-controlled studies, we determined whether individuals 
heterozygous for ALG8 PTVs are at increased risk of cystic kidney disease in a 
large, unselected health system-based observational cohort linked to electronic 
health records in Pennsylvania (Geisinger-Regeneron DiscovEHR MyCode study). Out 
of 174,172 patients, 236 were identified with ALG8 PTVs. Using ICD-based 
outcomes, patients with these variants were significantly at increased risk of 
having any kidney/liver cyst diagnosis (Odds Ratio 2.42, 95% confidence 
interval: 1.53-3.85), cystic kidney disease (3.03, 1.26-7.31), and 
nephrolithiasis (1.89, 1.96-2.97). To confirm this finding, blinded radiology 
review of computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging studies was 
completed in a matched cohort of 52 thirty-plus year old ALG8 PTV heterozygotes 
and related non-heterozygotes. ALG8 PTV heterozygotes were significantly more 
likely to have cystic kidney disease, defined as four or more kidney cysts 
(57.7% vs. 7.7%), or bilateral kidney cysts (69.2% vs. 15.4%), but not one or 
more liver cyst (11.5% vs. 7.7%). In publicly available UK Biobank data, ALG8 
PTV heterozygotes were at significantly increased risk of ICD code N28 (other 
disorders of kidney/ureter) (3.85% vs. 1.33%). ALG8 PTVs were not associated 
with chronic kidney disease or kidney failure in the MyCode study or the UK 
Biobank data. Thus, PTVs in ALG8 result in increased risk of a mild cystic 
kidney disease phenotype.

Copyright Â© 2022 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2022.11.025
PMCID: PMC10012037
PMID: 36574950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]