1. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Dec 7;13:1057701. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.1057701. 
eCollection 2022.

QTL mapping of yield components and kernel traits in wheat cultivars TAM 112 and 
Duster.

Wang Z(1), Dhakal S(1), Cerit M(1), Wang S(2), Rauf Y(1), Yu S(1), Maulana F(3), 
Huang W(3), Anderson JD(3), Ma XF(3), Rudd JC(1), Ibrahim AMH(4), Xue Q(1), Hays 
DB(4), Bernardo A(5), St Amand P(5), Bai G(5), Baker J(1), Baker S(1), Liu S(1).

Author information:
(1)Texas A&M AgriLife Research and Extension Center, Amarillo, TX, United 
States.
(2)Genomics and Bioinformatics Service Center, Texas A&M AgriLife Research, 
College Station, TX, United States.
(3)Noble Research Institute, Ardmore, OK, United States.
(4)Department of Soil and Crop Science, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX, United States.
(5)Central Small Grain Genotyping Lab and Hard Winter Wheat Genetics Research 
Unit, U.S. Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, Manhattan, 
KS, United States.

In the Southern Great Plains, wheat cultivars have been selected for a 
combination of outstanding yield and drought tolerance as a long-term breeding 
goal. To understand the underlying genetic mechanisms, this study aimed to 
dissect the quantitative trait loci (QTL) associated with yield components and 
kernel traits in two wheat cultivars `TAM 112' and `Duster' under both irrigated 
and dryland environments. A set of 182 recombined inbred lines (RIL) derived 
from the cross of TAM 112/Duster were planted in 13 diverse environments for 
evaluation of 18 yield and kernel related traits. High-density genetic linkage 
map was constructed using 5,081 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from 
genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS). QTL mapping analysis detected 134 QTL regions on 
all 21 wheat chromosomes, including 30 pleiotropic QTL regions and 21 consistent 
QTL regions, with 10 QTL regions in common. Three major pleiotropic QTL on the 
short arms of chromosomes 2B (57.5 - 61.6 Mbps), 2D (37.1 - 38.7 Mbps), and 7D 
(66.0 - 69.2 Mbps) colocalized with genes Ppd-B1, Ppd-D1, and FT-D1, 
respectively. And four consistent QTL associated with kernel length (KLEN), 
thousand kernel weight (TKW), plot grain yield (YLD), and kernel spike-1 (KPS) 
(Qklen.tamu.1A.325, Qtkw.tamu.2B.137, Qyld.tamu.2D.3, and Qkps.tamu.6A.113) 
explained more than 5% of the phenotypic variation. QTL Qklen.tamu.1A.325 is a 
novel QTL with consistent effects under all tested environments. Marker 
haplotype analysis indicated the QTL combinations significantly increased yield 
and kernel traits. QTL and the linked markers identified in this study will 
facilitate future marker-assisted selection (MAS) for pyramiding the favorable 
alleles and QTL map-based cloning.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wang, Dhakal, Cerit, Wang, Rauf, Yu, Maulana, Huang, Anderson, 
Ma, Rudd, Ibrahim, Xue, Hays, Bernardo, St. Amand, Bai, Baker, Baker and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.1057701
PMCID: PMC9768232
PMID: 36570880

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.