1. Sensors (Basel). 2022 Dec 29;23(1):358. doi: 10.3390/s23010358.

Coupled Field Analysis of Phenomena in Hybrid Excited Magnetorheological Fluid 
Brake.

Szelag W(1), Jedryczka C(1), Myszkowski A(2), Wojciechowski RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Electrical Engineering and Electronics, Poznan University of 
Technology, 60-965 Poznan, Poland.
(2)Institute of Mechanical Technology, Poznan University of Technology, 60-965 
Poznan, Poland.

The paper presents a field model of coupled phenomena occurring in an 
axisymmetric magnetorheological brake. The coupling between transient fluid 
dynamics and electromagnetic and thermal fields as well as mechanical 
equilibrium equations is taken into account. The magnetic field in the studied 
brake is of an excited hybrid manner, i.e., by the permanent magnets (PMs) and 
current Is in the excitation winding. The finite element method and a 
step-by-step algorithm have been implemented in the proposed field model of 
coupled phenomena in the considered brake. The nonlinearity of the magnetic 
circuit and rheological properties of a magnetorheological fluid (MR fluid) as 
well as the influence of temperature on the properties of materials have been 
taken into account. To solve equations of the obtained field model, the 
Newton-Raphson method and the coupled block over-relaxation method have been 
implemented. The elaborated algorithm has been successfully used in the analysis 
of the phenomena in the considered magnetorheological brake. The accuracy of the 
developed model and its usefulness have been verified by a comparative analysis 
of the results of simulation and laboratory tests carried out for the developed 
prototype of the studied brake.

DOI: 10.3390/s23010358
PMCID: PMC9824113
PMID: 36616957

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.