1. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Dec 22;13:1086506. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.1086506. 
eCollection 2022.

A genetic screen in Arabidopsis reveals the identical roles for RBP45d and 
PRP39a in 5' cryptic splice site selection.

Huang W(1), Zhang L(1), Zhu Y(2), Chen J(1), Zhu Y(1), Lin F(1), Chen X(1), 
Huang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Sciences, Development Center of 
Plant Germplasm Resources, College of Life Sciences, Shanghai Normal University, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Cryptic splice sites in eukaryotic genome are generally dormant unless activated 
by mutation of authentic splice sites or related splicing factors. How cryptic 
splice sites are used remains unclear in plants. Here, we identified two cryptic 
splicing regulators, RBP45d and PRP39a that are homologs of yeast U1 auxiliary 
protein Nam8 and Prp39, respectively, via genetic screening for suppressors of 
the virescent sot5 mutant, which results from a point mutation at the 5' splice 
site (5' ss) of SOT5 intron 7. Loss-of-function mutations in RBP45d and PRP39a 
significantly increase the level of a cryptically spliced variant that encodes a 
mutated but functional sot5 protein, rescuing sot5 to the WT phenotype. We 
furtherly demonstrated that RBP45d and PRP39a interact with each other and also 
with the U1C, a core subunit of U1 snRNP. We found that RBP45d directly binds to 
the uridine (U)-rich RNA sequence downstream the 5' ss of SOT5 intron 7. 
However, other RBP45/47 members do not function redundantly with RBP45d, at 
least in regulation of cryptic splicing. Taken together, RBP45d promotes U1 
snRNP to recognize the specific 5' ss via binding to intronic U-rich elements in 
plants.

Copyright Â© 2022 Huang, Zhang, Zhu, Chen, Zhu, Lin, Chen and Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.1086506
PMCID: PMC9813592
PMID: 36618610

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest