1. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2023 Feb;225:107529. doi:
10.1016/j.clineuro.2022.107529.  Epub 2022 Dec 2.

A novel homozygous missense mutation in L-2-HGA gene: A case report.

Liu Y(1), Wu Z(2), Wang W(3), Han H(4), Wang Y(5), Wang T(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Epilepsy Center, Lanzhou University Second Hospital, 
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730030, China. Electronic address: 
ery_liuyj@lzu.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Neurology, Epilepsy Center, Lanzhou University Second Hospital, 
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730030, China. Electronic address: wuzj2005@126.com.
(3)Department of Neurology, Epilepsy Center, Lanzhou University Second Hospital, 
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730030, China. Electronic address: 
wangwj2020@163.com.
(4)Department of Neurology, Epilepsy Center, Lanzhou University Second Hospital, 
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730030, China. Electronic address: 
1017254589@qq.com.
(5)Heart Center, the First Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou University, 
Lanzhou 730000, China. Electronic address: 504301402@qq.com.
(6)Department of Neurology, Epilepsy Center, Lanzhou University Second Hospital, 
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730030, China. Electronic address: 
wangtch@lzu.edu.cn.

L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (L-2-HGA) is a rare autosomal recessive disease 
resulted from the mutated gene L-2- hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase (L2HGDH). We 
presented a female case who inherited the disease from her consanguineous 
relatives and suffered from cognitive impairment, seizure, and ataxia. Using 
cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), urine organic acid test, and 
high-throughput DNA sequencing, a novel homozygous missense mutation was found 
in the L2HGDH gene, namely c 0.847 G>A/p. G283R in exon 7. Summarizing the 
clinical information of the patient with L-2-HGA exhibited to be beneficial for 
the diagnosis of this rare disease. In summary, the pathogenic missense mutation 
in the case was reliably confirmed using the bioinformatics analysis.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2022.107529
PMID: 36610237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no competing interest.