1. Turk J Gastroenterol. 2023 May;34(5):508-515. doi: 10.5152/tjg.2023.22339.

Objective Disease Monitoring Strategies from a Tertiary Inflammatory Bowel 
Disease Center in Hungary.

Lontai L(1), Kürti Z(1), Gonczi L(1), Komlódi N(1), Balogh F(1), Iliás Á(1), 
Lakatos PL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Oncology, Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Oncology, Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary; Department of Gastroenterology, McGill University Health 
Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Emerging data suggest that a treat-to-target approach and early 
therapeutic intervention using regular objective disease assessment leads to 
improved outcomes. Our aim was to evaluate the value of objective disease 
monitoring during regular follow-up in a single tertiary inflammatory bowel 
disease center.
METHODS: Consecutive inflammatory bowel disease patients (n = 161, Crohn's 
disease: 118/ulcerative colitis: 43; biological therapy: 70%) were included and 
followed up for 1 year between January and December 2018. Data on clinical 
disease activity, biomarkers, endoscopy, imaging, outpatient visits, treatment 
optimization, hospitalization, and surgery were collected. We compared the 
monitoring strategy according to the clinical activity 
(remission/flare/post-flare/continuous activity) every 3 months (assessment 
period).
RESULTS: In total, n = 644 assessment periods were evaluated. Biomarkers were 
evaluated in 82.9%-83.9% of patients in each assess ment period regardless of 
clinical activity. Colonoscopy was more frequently performed in active disease 
(flare/continuous disease activ ity: 21.1%/18.9% vs. clinical remission: 10.1% 
per assessment period). Magnetic resonance imaging was performed in 7.7%-16.7%/ 
period in Crohn's disease patients, while the use of computed tomography was low 
(2.4%/period) and mainly performed in active dis ease. Treatment optimization 
was more frequent in patients with active disease (biological start/dose 
optimization: 31.1%/33.8%/ period, steroid start: 13.2%/period). Patients with 
continuous activity (2.62), flare (2.45), and post-flare (2.05) had higher mean 
patient visit counts compared to remission (1.68/period).
CONCLUSIONS: Objective monitoring strategy was applied with routine assessment 
of clinical activity and biomarkers. Fast-track colo noscopic evaluations were 
adapted to the clinical stage of the disease while screening colonoscopies and 
magnetic resonance imaging were frequently used. Objective monitoring resulted 
in the early optimization of medical therapy and frequent specialist follow-up 
visits.

DOI: 10.5152/tjg.2023.22339
PMCID: PMC10334671
PMID: 36620930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]