1. Biochim Biophys Acta Gene Regul Mech. 2023 Mar;1866(1):194908. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2023.194908. Epub 2023 Jan 10.

The cellular pathways that maintain the quality control and transport of diverse 
potassium channels.

Nguyen NH(1), Brodsky JL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, A320 Langley 
Hall, Pittsburgh, 4249 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, A320 Langley 
Hall, Pittsburgh, 4249 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA. Electronic 
address: jbrodsky@pitt.edu.

Potassium channels are multi-subunit transmembrane proteins that permit the 
selective passage of potassium and play fundamental roles in physiological 
processes, such as action potentials in the nervous system and organismal salt 
and water homeostasis, which is mediated by the kidney. Like all ion channels, 
newly translated potassium channels enter the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and 
undergo the error-prone process of acquiring post-translational modifications, 
folding into their native conformations, assembling with other subunits, and 
trafficking through the secretory pathway to reach their final destinations, 
most commonly the plasma membrane. Disruptions in these processes can result in 
detrimental consequences, including various human diseases. Thus, multiple 
quality control checkpoints evolved to guide potassium channels through the 
secretory pathway and clear potentially toxic, aggregation-prone misfolded 
species. We will summarize current knowledge on the mechanisms underlying 
potassium channel quality control in the secretory pathway, highlight diseases 
associated with channel misfolding, and suggest potential therapeutic routes.

Copyright Â© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2023.194908
PMCID: PMC9908860
PMID: 36638864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.