1. Nutrients. 2023 Jan 7;15(2):308. doi: 10.3390/nu15020308.

Effect of Exercise on Arterial Stiffness in Healthy Young, Middle-Aged and Older 
Women: A Systematic Review.

Lan YS(1)(2), Khong TK(1), Yusof A(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Sports and Exercise Science, Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur 
50603, Malaysia.
(2)School of Physical Education, Changchun Normal University, Changchun 130032, 
China.

Arterial stiffness, an age-dependent phenomenon, is improved with exercise, 
which in turn may prevent cardiovascular diseases in women. However, there is a 
lack of consolidated information on the impact of exercise on arterial stiffness 
among healthy women. The aim of this review was to (i) analyse the effect of 
exercise on arterial stiffness in healthy young, middle-aged, and older women, 
and (ii) recommend types, intensity, and frequency for each age group. Database 
searches on PubMed, ScienceDirect, Web of Science, and Scopus were conducted 
using PRISMA guidelines until September 2022. The keywords were: exercise, 
women/female, and arterial stiffness. The inclusion criteria were: healthy 
women, supervised exercise, and arterial stiffness measures. Study quality and 
bias were assessed using the PEDro scale. Fifty-one papers were classified into 
young (n = 15), middle-aged (n = 14), and older (n = 22) women. Improvements in 
arterial stiffness were observed among: young women (Pulse Wave Velocity, PWV: 
4.9-6.6 m/s), following an 8-week high-intensity aerobic (3 days/week) or 
hypoxic high-intensity interval training; middle-aged women (PWV: 5.1-7.9 m/s), 
aerobic exercise with moderate intensity or stretching exercise at "moderate to 
heavy" (Borg Scale), 20-30 s per site, 10 s of rest interval for 30 min; and for 
older women (PWV: 7.9-15.6 m/s), resistance training at light intensity, aerobic 
exercise at any intensity, or a combination of the two exercises. This review 
shows that arterial stiffness increases with age in healthy women and has an 
inverse relationship with exercise intensity. Therefore, when prescribing 
exercise to improve arterial stiffness, age and arterial stiffness measures 
should be accounted for.

DOI: 10.3390/nu15020308
PMCID: PMC9867069
PMID: 36678179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.