1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jan 11;24(2):1405. doi: 10.3390/ijms24021405.

The Role of Cellular Prion Protein in Glioma Tumorigenesis Could Be through the 
Autophagic Mechanisms: A Narrative Review.

Armocida D(1)(2)(3), Busceti CL(3), Biagioni F(3), Fornai F(3), Frati A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Neuroscience, Sapienza University of Rome, Via Caserta 6, 
00161 Roma, Italy.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, 
Via Caserta 6, 00161 Roma, Italy.
(3)Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (I.R.C.C.S.) Neuromed, 
Via Atinense 18, 86077 Pozzilli, Italy.

The carcinogenesis of glial tumors appears complex because of the many genetic 
and epigenetic phenomena involved. Among these, cellular prion protein (PrPC) is 
considered a key factor in cell-death resistance and important aspect implicated 
in tumorigenesis. Autophagy also plays an important role in cell death in 
various pathological conditions. These two cellular phenomena are related and 
share the same activation by specific alterations in the cellular 
microenvironment. Furthermore, there is an interdependence between autophagy and 
prion activity in glioma tumorigenesis. Glioma is one of the most aggressive 
known cancers, and the fact that such poorly studied processes as autophagy and 
PrPC activity are so strongly involved in its carcinogenesis suggests that by 
better understanding their interaction, more can be understood about its origin 
and treatment. Few studies in the literature relate these two cellular 
phenomena, much less try to explain their combined activity and role in glioma 
carcinogenesis. In this study, we explored the recent findings on the molecular 
mechanism and regulation pathways of autophagy, examining the role of PrPC in 
autophagy processes and how they may play a central role in glioma 
tumorigenesis. Among the many molecular interactions that PrP physiologically 
performs, it appears that processes shared with autophagy activity are those 
most implicated in glial tumor carcinogeneses such as activity on MAP kinases, 
PI3K, and mTOR. This work can be supportive and valuable as a basis for further 
future studies on this topic.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24021405
PMCID: PMC9865539
PMID: 36674920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.