1. Front Microbiol. 2023 Jan 9;13:1103327. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1103327. 
eCollection 2022.

Orally administered recombinant Lactobacillus expressing African swine fever 
virus antigens that induced immunity responses.

Zhang H(1), Zhao S(1)(2), Zhang H(1), Shen Y(1), Zhang P(1), Shan H(1), Cai 
X(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, 
Shandong, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Shandong Agricultural University, 
Tai'an, Shandong, China.

Erratum in
    Front Microbiol. 2024 Dec 03;15:1529166. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1529166.

African swine fever (ASF) is a highly contagious, acute, febrile disease caused 
by the African swine fever virus (ASFV), with morbidity and mortality rates 
approaching 100% in domestic and wild swine, resulting in massive economic 
losses to the pig industry worldwide. This study aimed to express the p30, p54, 
and p72 proteins encoded by ASFV in vitro using the Lactobacillus lactis (L. 
lactis) expression system. Here, six new functional recombinant L. lactis were 
constructed, and the expression of the p30 protein, p54 protein, p72 protein, 
p30-LTB (heat-labile enterotoxin B, LTB) fusion protein, p54-LTB fusion protein, 
and the p72-LTB fusion protein was successfully detected by Western blot 
analysis. Following oral immunization of rabbits with recombinant L. lactis, 
serum IgG, intestinal mucosal sIgA, cytokines (IL-4 and INF-γ), and splenocyte 
viability were higher than in the control group via ELISA. Notably, without the 
LTB adjuvant group, humoral and Th1 cellular immunity were promoted, whereas, 
with the LTB adjuvant group, local mucosal immunity, humoral immunity, and Th2 
cellular immunity were promoted, providing new insights into the design and 
development of an ASFV subunit vaccine.

Copyright © 2023 Zhang, Zhao, Zhang, Shen, Zhang, Shan and Cai.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1103327
PMCID: PMC9869048
PMID: 36699597

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.