1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2023 Jan 9;15:1080136. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.1080136. 
eCollection 2022.

A mouse model of cone photoreceptor function loss (cpfl9) with degeneration due 
to a mutation in Gucy2e.

Naggert ASEN(1), Collin GB(1), Wang J(1), Krebs MP(1), Chang B(1).

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United States.

During routine screening of mouse strains and stocks by the Eye Mutant Resource 
at The Jackson Laboratory for genetic mouse models of human ocular disorders, we 
identified cpfl9, a mouse model with cone photoreceptor function loss. The mice 
exhibited an early-onset phenotype that was easily recognized by the absence of 
a cone-mediated b-wave electroretinography response and by a reduction in 
rod-mediated photoresponses at four weeks of age. By genetic mapping and 
high-throughput sequencing of a whole exome capture library of cpfl9, a 
homozygous 25 bp deletion within exon 11 of the Gucy2e gene was identified, 
which is predicted to result in a frame shift leading to premature termination. 
The corresponding protein in human, retinal guanylate cyclase 1 (GUCY2D), plays 
an important role in rod and cone photoreceptor cell function. Loss-of-function 
mutations in human GUCY2D cause LCA1, one of the most common forms of Leber 
congenital amaurosis, which results in blindness at birth or in early childhood. 
The early loss of cone and reduced rod photoreceptor cell function in the cpfl9 
mutant is accompanied by a later, progressive loss of cone and rod photoreceptor 
cells, which may be relevant to understanding disease pathology in a subset of 
LCA1 patients and in individuals with cone-rod dystrophy caused by recessive 
GUCY2D variants. cpfl9 mice will be useful for studying the role of Gucy2e in 
the retina.

Copyright © 2023 Naggert, Collin, Wang, Krebs and Chang.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.1080136
PMCID: PMC9868315
PMID: 36698779

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.