1. Front Genet. 2023 Jan 9;13:976814. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.976814. eCollection
 2022.

The host genetics affects gut microbiome diversity in Chinese depressed 
patients.

Han K(1)(2), Ji L(1)(2), Wang C(1)(2), Shao Y(3), Chen C(4), Liu L(1)(2), Feng 
M(1)(2), Yang F(1)(2), Wu X(1)(2), Li X(1)(2), Xie Q(5), He L(1)(2), Shi 
Y(1)(2), He G(1)(2), Dong Z(6), Yu T(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric 
Disorders, Bio-X Institutes, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Brain Science and Technology 
Research Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Asbios (Tianjin) Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Tianjin, China.
(4)School of Mental Health, Jining Medical University, Jining, China.
(5)Out-patient Department of West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China.
(6)Mental Health Center of West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China.
(7)Shanghai Center for Women and Children's Health, Shanghai, China.

The gut microbiome and host genetics are both associated with major depressive 
disorder (MDD); however, the molecular mechanisms among the associations are 
poorly understood, especially in the Asian, Chinese group. Our study applied 
linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) and genome-wide 
association analysis in the cohort with both gut sequencing data and genomics 
data. We reported the different gut microbiota characteristics between MDD and 
control groups in the Chinese group and further constructed the association 
between host genetics and the gut microbiome. Actinobacteria and Pseudomonades 
were found more in the MDD group. We found significant differences in the ACE 
and Chao indexes of alpha diversity while no discrepancy in beta diversity. We 
found three associations between host genetics with microbiome features: beta 
diversity and rs6108 (p = 8.65 × 10-9), Actinobacteria and rs77379751 (p = 8.56 
× 10-9), and PWY-5913 and rs1775633082 (p = 4.54 × 10-8). A species of the 
Romboutsia genus was co-associated with the species of Ruminococcus gnavus in an 
internetwork through four genes: METTL8, ITGB2, OTULIN, and PROSER3, with a 
strict threshold (p < 5 × 10-4). Furthermore, our findings suggested that the 
gut microbiome diversity might affect microRNA expression in the brain and 
influenced SERPINA5 and other spatially close genes afterward. These findings 
suggest new linkages between depression and gut microbiome in Asian, Chinese 
people, which might be mediated by genes and microRNA regulation in space 
distance.

Copyright © 2023 Han, Ji, Wang, Shao, Chen, Liu, Feng, Yang, Wu, Li, Xie, He, 
Shi, He, Dong and Yu.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.976814
PMCID: PMC9868868
PMID: 36699448

Conflict of interest statement: Author YS was employed by the company Asbios 
(Tianjin) Biotechnology Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the 
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.