1. Front Plant Sci. 2023 Jan 9;13:1095359. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.1095359. 
eCollection 2022.

Outlier analyses and genome-wide association study identify glgC and ERD6-like 4 
as candidate genes for foliar water-soluble carbohydrate accumulation in 
Trifolium repens.

Pearson SM(1)(2), Griffiths AG(2), Maclean P(2), Larking AC(2), Hong SW(2), 
Jauregui R(2), Miller P(2), McKenzie CM(2), Lockhart PJ(1), Tate JA(1), Ford 
JL(3), Faville MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Natural Sciences, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand.
(2)Resilient Agriculture, AgResearch Grasslands, Palmerston North, New Zealand.
(3)Grasslands, PGG Wrightson Seeds Limited, Palmerston North, New Zealand.

Increasing water-soluble carbohydrate (WSC) content in white clover is important 
for improving nutritional quality and reducing environmental impacts from 
pastoral agriculture. Elucidation of genes responsible for foliar WSC variation 
would enhance genetic improvement by enabling molecular breeding approaches. The 
aim of the present study was to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
associated with variation in foliar WSC in white clover. A set of 935 white 
clover individuals, randomly sampled from five breeding pools selectively bred 
for divergent (low or high) WSC content, were assessed with 14,743 
genotyping-by-sequencing SNPs, using three outlier detection methods: PCAdapt, 
BayeScan and KGD-FST. These analyses identified 33 SNPs as discriminating 
between high and low WSC populations and putatively under selection. One SNP was 
located in the intron of ERD6-like 4, a gene coding for a sugar transporter 
located on the vacuole membrane. A genome-wide association study using a subset 
of 605 white clover individuals and 5,757 SNPs, identified a further 12 SNPs, 
one of which was associated with a starch biosynthesis gene, glucose-1-phosphate 
adenylyltransferase, glgC. Our results provide insight into genomic regions 
underlying WSC accumulation in white clover, identify candidate genomic regions 
for further functional validation studies, and reveal valuable information for 
marker-assisted or genomic selection in white clover.

Copyright Â© 2023 Pearson, Griffiths, Maclean, Larking, Hong, Jauregui, Miller, 
McKenzie, Lockhart, Tate, Ford and Faville.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.1095359
PMCID: PMC9868827
PMID: 36699852

Conflict of interest statement: Author JF is employed by PGG Wrightson Seeds 
Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as 
a potential conflict of interest.