1. Life Sci Alliance. 2023 Jan 25;6(4):e202201640. doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201640. 
Print 2023 Apr.

The GET pathway serves to activate Atg32-mediated mitophagy by ER targeting of 
the Ppg1-Far complex.

Onishi M(1), Kubota M(1), Duan L(1), Tian Y(1), Okamoto K(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Mitochondrial Dynamics, Graduate School of Frontier 
Biosciences, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Mitochondrial Dynamics, Graduate School of Frontier 
Biosciences, Osaka University, Suita, Japan okamoto.koji.fbs@osaka-u.ac.jp.

Mitophagy removes defective or superfluous mitochondria via selective autophagy. 
In yeast, the pro-mitophagic protein Atg32 localizes to the mitochondrial 
surface and interacts with the scaffold protein Atg11 to promote degradation of 
mitochondria. Although Atg32-Atg11 interactions are thought to be stabilized by 
Atg32 phosphorylation, how this posttranslational modification is regulated 
remains obscure. Here, we show that cells lacking the guided entry of the 
tail-anchored protein (GET) pathway exhibit reduced Atg32 phosphorylation and 
Atg32-Atg11 interactions, which can be rescued by additional loss of the 
ER-resident Ppg1-Far complex, a multi-subunit phosphatase negatively acting in 
mitophagy. In GET-deficient cells, Ppg1-Far is predominantly localized to 
mitochondria. An artificial ER anchoring of Ppg1-Far in GET-deficient cells 
significantly ameliorates defects in Atg32-Atg11 interactions and mitophagy. 
Moreover, disruption of GET and Msp1, an AAA-ATPase that extracts 
non-mitochondrial proteins localized to the mitochondrial surface, elicits 
synthetic defects in mitophagy. Collectively, we propose that the GET pathway 
mediates ER targeting of Ppg1-Far, thereby preventing dysregulated suppression 
of mitophagy activation.

Â© 2023 Onishi et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202201640
PMCID: PMC9880027
PMID: 36697253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.