1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Jan 10;13:1013894. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.1013894. eCollection 2022.

Identification and characterization of novel compound heterozygous variants in 
FSHR causing primary ovarian insufficiency with resistant ovary syndrome.

Chen X(1)(2), Chen L(3), Wang Y(2)(4), Shu C(1), Zhou Y(1), Wu R(1), Jin B(1), 
Yang L(2), Sun J(5), Qi M(6), Shu J(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Department of Reproductive Endocrinology, 
Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital, Affiliated People's Hospital, Hangzhou 
Medical College, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Zhejiang Provincial People's 
Hospital, Affiliated People's Hospital, Hangzhou Medical College, Hangzhou, 
China.
(3)School of Laboratory Medicine and Bioengineering, Hangzhou Medical College, 
Hangzhou, China.
(4)The Second Clinical Medical School of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 
China.
(5)Reproductive Medicine Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou 
Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(6)Department of Cell Biology and Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is among the foremost causes of women 
infertility due to premature partial or total loss of ovarian function. 
Resistant ovary syndrome (ROS) is a subtype of POI manifested as normal ovarian 
reserve but insensitive to gonadotropin stimulation. Inactivating variants of 
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR), a class A G-protein coupled 
receptor, have been associated with POI and are inherited via an autosomal 
recessive pattern. In this study, we investigated the genetic causes of a 
primary infertility patient manifested as POI with ROS, and elucidated the 
structural and functional impact of variants of uncertain significance. 
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) combined with Sanger sequencing revealed novel 
compound heterozygous FSHR variants: c.1384G>C/p.Ala462Pro and 
c.1862C>T/p.Ala621Val, inherited from her father and mother, respectively. The 
two altered amino acid sequences, localized in the third and seventh 
transmembrane helix of FSHR, were predicted as deleterious by in silico 
prediction. In vitro experiments revealed that the p.Ala462Pro variant resulted 
in barely detectable levels of intracellular signaling both in cAMP-dependent 
CRE-reporter activity and ERK activation and displayed a severely reduced plasma 
membrane receptor expression. In contrast, the p.Ala621Val variant resulted in 
partial loss of receptor activation without disruption of cell surface 
expression. In conclusion, two unreported inactivating FSHR variants potentially 
responsible for POI with ROS were first identified. This study expands the 
current phenotypic and genotypic spectrum of POI.

Copyright Â© 2023 Chen, Chen, Wang, Shu, Zhou, Wu, Jin, Yang, Sun, Qi and Shu.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.1013894
PMCID: PMC9871476
PMID: 36704038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.