1. Front Immunol. 2023 Jan 10;13:1081889. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1081889. 
eCollection 2022.

Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals the molecular features of peripheral blood 
immune cells in children, adults and centenarians.

Zhong J(1)(2)(3), Ding R(4), Jiang H(1)(2)(3), Li L(4), Wan J(1)(2), Feng 
X(1)(2)(3), Chen M(1)(2), Peng L(1)(2)(3), Li X(1)(2), Lin J(1)(2), Yang 
H(1)(2)(3), Wang M(1)(2)(3), Li Q(1)(2)(3), Chen Q(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 
Chongqing, China.
(2)National Clinical Research Center for Child Health and Disorders, Ministry of 
Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing, China.
(3)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, Chongqing, China.
(4)Nanjing Jiangbei New Area Biopharmaceutical Public Service Platform Co. Ltd, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Peripheral blood immune cells have different molecular characteristics at 
different stages of the whole lifespan. Knowledge of circulating immune cell 
types and states from children to centenarians remains incomplete. We profiled 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of multiple age groups with 
single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), involving the age ranges of 1-12 (G1), 
20-30(G2), 30-60(G3), 60-80(G4), and >110 years (G5). The proportion and states 
of myeloid cells change significantly from G1 to G2. We identified a novel 
CD8+CCR7+GZMB+ cytotoxic T cell subtype specific in G1, expressing naive and 
cytotoxic genes, and validated by flow cytometry. CD8+ T cells showed 
significant changes in the early stage (G1 to G2), while CD4+ T cells changed in 
the late stage (G4 to G5). Moreover, the intercellular crosstalk among PBMCs in 
G1 is very dynamic. Susceptibility genes for a variety of autoimmune diseases 
(AIDs) have different cell-specific expression localization, and the expression 
of susceptibility genes for AIDs changes with age. Notably, the CD3+ undefined T 
cells clearly expressed susceptibility genes for multiple AIDs, especially in 
G3. ETS1 and FLI1, susceptibility genes associated with systemic lupus 
erythematosus, were differentially expressed in CD4+ and CD8+ effector cells in 
G1 and G3. These results provided a valuable basis for future research on the 
unique immune system of the whole lifespan and AIDs.

Copyright Â© 2023 Zhong, Ding, Jiang, Li, Wan, Feng, Chen, Peng, Li, Lin, Yang, 
Wang, Li and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1081889
PMCID: PMC9871912
PMID: 36703979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors RD and LL were employed by Nanjing 
Jiangbei New Area Biopharmaceutical Public Service Platform. The remaining 
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.