1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Jan 10:2023.01.10.523477. doi: 
10.1101/2023.01.10.523477.

Hypoxia-inducing cryogels uncover key cancer-immune cell interactions in an 
oxygen-deficient tumor microenvironment.

Colombani T(1), Rogers ZJ(1), Bhatt K(2), Sinoimeri J(1), Gerbereux L(1), 
Hamrangsekachaee M(1), Bencherif SA(1)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 
02115, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, 
United States.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, 
United States of America.
(4)Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard 
University, Cambridge, MA 02138, United States of America.
(5)Biomechanics and Bioengineering (BMBI), UTC CNRS UMR 7338, University of 
Technology of Compiègne, Sorbonne University, 60203 Compiègne, France.

Update in
    Bioact Mater. 2023 Aug 09;29:279-295. doi: 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2023.06.021.

Hypoxia, an important feature of solid tumors, is a major factor shaping the 
immune landscape, and several cancer models have been developed to emulate 
hypoxic tumors. However, to date, they still have several limitations, such as 
the lack of reproducibility, inadequate biophysical cues, limited immune cell 
infiltration, and poor oxygen (O 2 ) control, leading to non-pathophysiological 
tumor responses. As a result, it is essential to develop new and improved cancer 
models that mimic key features of the tumor extracellular matrix and recreate 
tumor-associated hypoxia while allowing cell infiltration and cancer-immune cell 
interactions. Herein, hypoxia-inducing cryogels (HICs) have been engineered 
using hyaluronic acid (HA) as macroporous scaffolds to fabricate 
three-dimensional microtissues and model a hypoxic tumor microenvironment. 
Specifically, tumor cell-laden HICs have been designed to deplete O 2 locally 
and induce long-standing hypoxia. This state of low oxygen tension, leading to 
HIF-1α stabilization in tumor cells, resulted in changes in hypoxia-responsive 
gene expression and phenotype, a metabolic adaptation to anaerobic glycolysis, 
and chemotherapy resistance. Additionally, HIC-supported tumor models induced 
dendritic cell (DC) inhibition, revealing a phenotypic change in plasmacytoid 
B220 + DC (pDC) subset and an impaired conventional B220 - DC (cDC) response in 
hypoxia. Lastly, our HIC-based melanoma model induced CD8+ T cell inhibition, a 
condition associated with the downregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokine 
secretion, increased expression of immunomodulatory factors, and decreased 
degranulation and cytotoxic capacity of T cells. Overall, these data suggest 
that HICs can be used as a tool to model solid-like tumor microenvironments and 
identify a phenotypic transition from cDC to pDC in hypoxia and the key 
contribution of HA in retaining cDC phenotype and inducing their 
hypoxia-mediated immunosuppression. This technology has great potential to 
deepen our understanding of the complex relationships between cancer and immune 
cells in low O 2 conditions and may pave the way for developing more effective 
therapies.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.01.10.523477
PMCID: PMC9882080
PMID: 36711715

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.