1. Front Genet. 2023 Jan 13;14:1103620. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1103620. 
eCollection 2023.

Phenotypic and genetic characteristics of 130 patients with 
mucopolysaccharidosis type II: A single-center retrospective study in China.

Zhang Z(1), Ma M(1), Zhang W(2), Zhou Y(1), Yao F(2), Zhu L(2), Wei M(1), Qiu 
Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Genetics Laboratory, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 
China.

Background: Mucopolysaccharidosis Type II (MPS II) is a rare, progressive and 
ultimately fatal X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by mutations in the 
iduronate-2-sulfatase (IDS) gene. This report conducted a retrospective analysis 
to investigate the clinical characteristics, genotypes and management strategies 
in a large cohort of Chinese patients with MPS II. Methods: In this study, we 
explored 130 Chinese patients with MPS II between September 2008 and April 2022. 
Clinical manifestations, auxiliary examination, IDS pathogenic gene variants and 
IDS enzyme activity, surgical history were analysed in the study. Results: A 
total of 130 patients were enrolled and the mean age at diagnosis was 5 years 
old. This study found the most common symptoms in our patients were claw-like 
hands, followed by coarse facial features, birthmarks (Mongolian spot), delayed 
development, inguinal or umbilical hernia. The most commonly cardiac 
manifestations were valve abnormalities, which were mitral/tricuspid valve 
regurgitation (71.9%) and aortic/pulmonary valve regurgitation (36.8%). We had 
found 43 different IDS pathogenic gene variants in 55 patients, included 16 
novel variants. The variants were concentrated in exon 9 (20% = 11/55), exon 3 
(20% = 11/55) and exon 8 (15% = 8/55). A total of 50 patients (38.5%) underwent 
surgical treatment, receiving a total of 63 surgeries. The average age of first 
surgery was 2.6 years, and the majority of surgery (85.7%, 54/63) was operated 
before 4 years old. The most common and earliest surgery was hernia repair. 
Three patients were died of respiratory failure. Conclusion: This study provided 
additional information on the clinical, cardiac ultrasound and surgical 
procedure in MPS II patients. Our study expanded the genotype spectrum of MPS 
II. Based on these data, characterization of MPS II patients group could be used 
to early diagnosis and treatment of the disease.

Copyright © 2023 Zhang, Ma, Zhang, Zhou, Yao, Zhu, Wei and Qiu.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1103620
PMCID: PMC9880164
PMID: 36713083

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.