1. Development. 2023 Feb 1;150(3):dev201228. doi: 10.1242/dev.201228. Epub 2023
Jan  30.

Single-cell RNA-based phenotyping reveals a pivotal role of thyroid hormone 
receptor alpha for hypothalamic development.

Sreenivasan VKA(1), Dore R(2), Resch J(2), Maier J(2), Dietrich C(3), Henck 
J(1)(3), Balachandran S(1)(4), Mittag J(2), Spielmann M(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, 
University of Lübeck and University of Kiel, Lübeck 23562, Germany.
(2)Institute for Endocrinology and Diabetes, University of Lübeck and 
Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein Campus Lübeck, Center of Brain Behavior 
and Metabolism (CBBM), Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23562 Lübeck, Germany.
(3)Human Molecular Genomics Group, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 
Berlin 14195, Germany.
(4)German Centre for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), partner site 
Hamburg/Lübeck/Kiel, Lübeck 23562, Germany.

Thyroid hormone and its receptor TRα1 play an important role in brain 
development. Several animal models have been used to investigate this function, 
including mice heterozygous for the TRα1R384C mutation, which confers 
receptor-mediated hypothyroidism. These mice display abnormalities in several 
autonomic functions, which was partially attributed to a developmental defect in 
hypothalamic parvalbumin neurons. However, whether other cell types in the 
hypothalamus are similarly affected remains unknown. Here, we used 
single-nucleus RNA sequencing to obtain an unbiased view on the importance of 
TRα1 for hypothalamic development and cellular diversity. Our data show that 
defective TRα1 signaling has surprisingly little effect on the development of 
hypothalamic neuronal populations, but it heavily affects hypothalamic 
oligodendrocytes. Using selective reactivation of the mutant TRα1 during 
specific developmental periods, we find that early postnatal thyroid hormone 
action seems to be crucial for proper hypothalamic oligodendrocyte maturation. 
Taken together, our findings underline the well-known importance of postnatal 
thyroid health for brain development and provide an unbiased roadmap for the 
identification of cellular targets of TRα1 action in mouse hypothalamic 
development.

© 2023. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.201228
PMCID: PMC10110490
PMID: 36715020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.