1. Front Pediatr. 2023 Jan 16;10:1042302. doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.1042302. 
eCollection 2022.

Case report: Primary immunodeficiency due to a novel mutation in CARMIL2 and its 
response to combined immunomodulatory therapy.

Zhu Y(1), Ye L(1), Huang H(1), Xu X(1), Liu Y(1), Wang J(2), Jin Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology & Immunology, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Shanghai 
Children's Medical Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, China.

Capping protein regulator and myosin 1 linker 2 (CARMIL2) is necessary for 
invadopodia formation, cell polarity, lamellipodial assembly, membrane ruffling, 
acropinocytosis, and collective cell migration. CARMIL2 deficiency is a rare 
autosomal recessive disease characterized by dysfunction in naïve T-cell 
activation, proliferation, differentiation, and effector function and 
insufficient responses in T-cell memory. In this paper, we report a 9-year-old 
female patient with a novel pathogenic variant in CARMIL2 
(c.2063C > G:p.Thr688Arg) who presented with various symptoms of primary 
immunodeficiencies including recurrent upper and lower respiratory infections, 
perioral and perineum papules, reddish impetiginized atopic dermatitis, oral 
ulcer, painful urination and vaginitis, otitis media, and failure to thrive. A 
missense mutation leading to insufficient CARMIL2 protein expression, reduced 
absolute T-cell and natural killer cell (NK cell) counts, and marked skewing to 
the naïve T-cell form was identified and indicated defective maturation of T 
cells and B cells. Following 1 year of multitargeted treatment with 
corticosteroids, hydroxychloroquine, mycophenolate mofetil, and thymosin, the 
patient presented with significant regression in rashes. CD4+ T-cell, CD8+ 
T-cell, and NK cell counts were significantly improved.

© 2023 Zhu, Ye, Huang, Xu, Liu, Wang and Jin.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2022.1042302
PMCID: PMC9884805
PMID: 36727012

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.