1. Prev Nutr Food Sci. 2022 Dec 31;27(4):335-346. doi: 10.3746/pnf.2022.27.4.335.

A New Frontier in Studying Dietary Phytochemicals in Cancer and in Health: 
Metabolic and Epigenetic Reprogramming.

Shannar A(1), Sarwar MS(2), Kong AT(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Pharmaceutical Science, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The 
State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Metabolic rewiring and epigenetic reprogramming are closely inter-related, and 
mutually regulate each other to control cell growth in cancer initiation, 
promotion, progression, and metastasis. Epigenetics plays a crucial role in 
regulating normal cellular functions as well as pathological conditions in many 
diseases, including cancer. Conversely, certain mitochondrial metabolites are 
considered as essential cofactors and regulators of epigenetic mechanisms. 
Furthermore, dysregulation of metabolism promotes tumor cell growth and 
reprograms the cells to produce metabolites and bioenergy needed to support 
cancer cell proliferation. Hence, metabolic reprogramming which alters the 
metabolites/epigenetic cofactors, would drive the epigenetic landscape, 
including DNA methylation and histone modification, that could lead to cancer 
initiation, promotion, and progression. Recognizing the diverse array of 
benefits of phytochemicals, they are gaining increasing interest in cancer 
interception and treatment. One of the significant mechanisms of cancer 
interception and treatment by phytochemicals is reprogramming of the key 
metabolic pathways and remodeling of cancer epigenetics. This review focuses on 
the metabolic remodeling and epigenetics reprogramming in cancer and 
investigates the potential mechanisms by which phytochemicals can mitigate 
cancer.

Copyright Â© 2022 by The Korean Society of Food Science and Nutrition. All rights 
Reserved.

DOI: 10.3746/pnf.2022.27.4.335
PMCID: PMC9843711
PMID: 36721757

Conflict of interest statement: AUTHOR DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors declare 
no conflict of interest.