1. FEBS J. 2023 Jun;290(11):2954-2967. doi: 10.1111/febs.16745. Epub 2023 Feb 15.

Regulation of alanine racemase activity by carboxylates and the d-type substrate 
d-alanine.

Shimizu-Ibuka A(1)(2), Sato A(1), Ichimura H(1), Hiraga H(1), Nakayama S(1), 
Nishiwaki T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Life Sciences, Niigata University of Pharmacy and 
Applied Life Sciences, Japan.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Kanagawa University, 
Japan.
(3)Niigata Agricultural Research Institute Food Research Center, Japan.

Alanine racemases (ALRs) are essential for d-alanine (d-Ala) production in 
bacteria, and many ALRs have a conserved carbamylated lysine residue in the 
active site. Although short-chain carboxylates inhibit ALRs harbouring this 
lysine residue as substrate analogues, in an ALR variant with an alanine residue 
at this position, carboxylates behave as activators; however, this activation 
mechanism remains unclear. Here, we performed kinetic and structural analyses of 
U1ALR, an ALR from Latilactobacillus sakei UONUMA harbouring a glycine residue 
(Gly134) in the site of the carbamylated lysine residue. U1ALR was activated by 
various carboxylates and also by a G134K mutation, both of which caused a 
significant decrease in Km , indicating an increase in substrate affinity. The 
U1ALR crystal structure revealed the presence of an acetate molecule bound in a 
position and at an orientation resembling the conformation of the carbamylated 
lysine side chain observed in the structures of other ALRs. These results 
suggest a regulatory mechanism for U1ALR activity involving two 
carboxylate-binding sites: one with high affinity near Gly134, where an acetate 
molecule is observed in the crystal structure and carboxylate binding results in 
enzyme activation; the other is the substrate-binding site, where carboxylate 
binding inhibits enzyme activity. Furthermore, we observed no 
carboxylate/G134K-mediated activation in the presence of d-Ala at high 
concentrations, implying that d-Ala also exhibits low-affinity binding in the 
first carboxylate-binding site and prevents carboxylate/G134K-induced 
activation. Such regulation of enzyme activity by carboxylates and d-Ala may be 
ubiquitous in many ALRs from lactic acid bacteria sharing the same sequence 
characteristics.

Â© 2023 The Authors. The FEBS Journal published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.16745
PMID: 36732053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]