1. J Pharm Sci. 2023 Jun;112(6):1664-1670. doi: 10.1016/j.xphs.2023.01.024. Epub 
2023 Feb 2.

Immunogenicity Evaluation of Thermostable Microparticles Entrapping Receptor 
Binding Domain of SARS-CoV-2 by Single Point Administration.

Ahuja R(1), Srichandan S(2), Meena J(3), Biswal BK(4), Panda AK(5).

Author information:
(1)Product Development Cell, National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, 
110067, India; Infection and Immunology Laboratory, Translational Health Science 
& Technology Institute, Faridabad, Haryana, 120001, India. Electronic address: 
rahul74@nii.ac.in.
(2)Product Development Cell, National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, 
110067, India.
(3)Product Development Cell, National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, 
110067, India; Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering and Technology, Indian 
Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Uttar Pradesh, 221005, 
India.
(4)Structural and Functional Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, New 
Delhi, 110067, India.
(5)Product Development Cell, National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, 
110067, India. Electronic address: amulya11panda@gmail.com.

Receptor binding domain (RBD) of SARS-CoV-2 is a prime vaccine target against 
which neutralizing antibody responses are directed. Purified RBD as a vaccine 
candidate warrants administration of multiple doses along with adjuvants and use 
of delivery systems to improve its immunogenicity. The present investigation 
examines the immunogenicity of RBD delivered by biodegradable polymer particles 
from single dose administration. Mice upon single point immunization of RBD 
entrapped microparticles generated improved antibody response. The polymer 
microparticles showed better temperature stability and could be stored at 37 
degrees for one month without any considerable loss of immunogenicity. Further, 
immunization with microparticles could elicit memory antibody response upon 
challenge after four months of single dose administration. Thus, using 
microparticles entrapping RBD as a vaccine candidate confer improved 
immunogenicity, temperature stability and recall response. These thermostable 
microparticles seem to be a potentially cost-effective approach which can help 
in dose reduction, provide a wider access of vaccines and accelerate the end of 
global pandemic.

Copyright Â© 2023 American Pharmacists Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xphs.2023.01.024
PMCID: PMC9891792
PMID: 36736778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.