1. J Anat. 2023 Jul;243(1):78-89. doi: 10.1111/joa.13845. Epub 2023 Feb 6.

Enhancer trap lines with GFP driven by smad6b and frizzled1 regulatory sequences 
for the study of epithelial morphogenesis in the developing zebrafish inner ear.

Baldera D(1), Baxendale S(1), van Hateren NJ(1), Marzo M(1), Glendenning E(1), 
Geng FS(2), Yokoya K(3), Knight RD(3), Whitfield TT(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(2)Brain and Mind Research Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(3)Centre for Craniofacial and Regenerative Biology, King's College London, 
Guy's Hospital, London, UK.

Live imaging in the zebrafish embryo using tissue-specific expression of 
fluorescent proteins can yield important insights into the mechanisms that drive 
sensory organ morphogenesis and cell differentiation. Morphogenesis of the 
semicircular canal ducts of the vertebrate inner ear requires a complex 
rearrangement of epithelial cells, including outgrowth, adhesion, fusion and 
perforation of epithelial projections to generate pillars of tissue that form 
the hubs of each canal. We report the insertion sites and expression patterns of 
two enhancer trap lines in the developing zebrafish embryo, each of which 
highlight different aspects of epithelial cell morphogenesis in the inner ear. A 
membrane-linked EGFP driven by smad6b regulatory sequences is expressed 
throughout the otic epithelium, most strongly on the lateral side of the ear and 
in the sensory cristae. A second enhancer trap line, with cytoplasmic EGFP 
driven by frizzled1 (fzd1) regulatory sequences, specifically marks cells of the 
ventral projection and pillar in the developing ear, and marginal cells in the 
sensory cristae, together with variable expression in the retina and epiphysis, 
and neurons elsewhere in the developing central nervous system. We have used a 
combination of methods to identify the insertion sites of these two transgenes, 
which were generated through random insertion, and show that Targeted Locus 
Amplification is a rapid and reliable method for the identification of insertion 
sites of randomly inserted transgenes.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Anatomy published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of Anatomical Society.

DOI: 10.1111/joa.13845
PMCID: PMC10273346
PMID: 36748120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.