1. Neural Regen Res. 2023 Aug;18(8):1818-1826. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.360242.

Exendin-4 and linagliptin attenuate neuroinflammation in a mouse model of 
Parkinson's disease.

Yu HY(1), Sun T(2), Wang Z(3), Li H(3), Xu D(3), An J(1), Wen LL(1), Li JY(4), 
Li W(4), Feng J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, 
Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, 
Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China.
(3)Laboratory of Research in Parkinson's Disease and Related Disorders, Health 
Sciences Institute, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province, 
China.
(4)Laboratory of Research in Parkinson's Disease and Related Disorders, Health 
Sciences Institute, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province, 
China; Neural Plasticity and Repair Unit, Department of Experimental Medical 
Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Use of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist or dipeptidyl peptidase 4 
inhibitor has been shown to lower the incidence of Parkinson's disease in 
patients with diabetes mellitus. Therefore, using these two treatments may help 
treat Parkinson's disease. To further investigate the mechanisms of action of 
these two compounds, we established a model of Parkinson's disease by treating 
mice with 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine and then subcutaneously 
injected them with the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist exendin-4 or the 
dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitor linagliptin. We found that both exendin-4 and 
linagliptin reversed motor dysfunction, glial activation, and dopaminergic 
neuronal death in this model. In addition, both exendin-4 and linagliptin 
induced microglial polarization to the anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype and 
reduced pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion. Moreover, in vitro experiments 
showed that treatment with exendin-4 and linagliptin inhibited activation of the 
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain- and leucine-rich-repeat- and 
pyrin-domain-containing 3/caspase-1/interleukin-1β pathway and subsequent 
pyroptosis by decreasing the production of reactive oxygen species. These 
findings suggest that exendin-4 and linagliptin exert neuroprotective effects by 
attenuating neuroinflammation through regulation of microglial polarization and 
the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain- and leucine-rich-repeat- and 
pyrin-domain-containing 3/caspase-1/interleukin-1β pathway in a mouse model of 
Parkinson's disease induced by 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine. 
Therefore, these two drugs may serve as novel anti-inflammatory treatments for 
Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.4103/1673-5374.360242
PMCID: PMC10154509
PMID: 36751811

Conflict of interest statement: None