1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Feb 1:2023.02.01.526549. doi: 
10.1101/2023.02.01.526549.

Multi-input drug-controlled switches of mammalian gene expression based on 
engineered nuclear hormone receptors.

Kretschmer S(1)(2), Perry N(1)(2)(3), Zhang Y(1)(2), Kortemme T(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(2)California Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI) at UCSF, San Francisco, 
CA 94158, USA.
(3)University of California, Berkeley-University of California, San Francisco 
Joint Graduate Program in Bioengineering, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Update in
    ACS Synth Biol. 2023 Jul 21;12(7):1924-1934. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.3c00080.

Protein-based switches that respond to different inputs to regulate cellular 
outputs, such as gene expression, are central to synthetic biology. For 
increased controllability, multi-input switches that integrate several 
cooperating and competing signals for the regulation of a shared output are of 
particular interest. The nuclear hormone receptor (NHR) superfamily offers 
promising starting points for engineering multi-input-controlled responses to 
clinically approved drugs. Starting from the VgEcR/RXR pair, we demonstrate that 
novel (multi-)drug regulation can be achieved by exchange of the ecdysone 
receptor (EcR) ligand binding domain (LBD) for other human NHR-derived LBDs. For 
responses activated to saturation by an agonist for the first LBD, we show that 
outputs can be boosted by an agonist targeting the second LBD. In combination 
with an antagonist, output levels are tunable by up to three simultaneously 
present small-molecule drugs. Such high-level control validates NHRs as a 
versatile, engineerable platform for programming multi-drug-controlled 
responses.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.02.01.526549
PMCID: PMC9915577
PMID: 36778233