1. Cell Res. 2023 Apr;33(4):288-298. doi: 10.1038/s41422-023-00778-3. Epub 2023
Feb  13.

Human IFT-A complex structures provide molecular insights into ciliary 
transport.

Jiang M(1), Palicharla VR(2), Miller D(1), Hwang SH(2), Zhu H(1), Hixson P(1), 
Mukhopadhyay S(3), Sun J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA. Saikat.Mukhopadhyay@UTSouthwestern.edu.
(4)Department of Structural Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA. ji.sun@stjude.org.

Intraflagellar transport (IFT) complexes, IFT-A and IFT-B, form bidirectional 
trains that move along the axonemal microtubules and are essential for 
assembling and maintaining cilia. Mutations in IFT subunits lead to numerous 
ciliopathies involving multiple tissues. However, how IFT complexes assemble and 
mediate cargo transport lacks mechanistic understanding due to missing 
high-resolution structural information of the holo-complexes. Here we report 
cryo-EM structures of human IFT-A complexes in the presence and absence of TULP3 
at overall resolutions of 3.0-3.9 Å. IFT-A adopts a "lariat" shape with 
interconnected core and peripheral subunits linked by structurally vital 
zinc-binding domains. TULP3, the cargo adapter, interacts with IFT-A through its 
N-terminal region, and interface mutations disrupt cargo transport. We also 
determine the molecular impacts of disease mutations on complex formation and 
ciliary transport. Our work reveals IFT-A architecture, sheds light on ciliary 
transport and IFT train formation, and enables the rationalization of disease 
mutations in ciliopathies.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41422-023-00778-3
PMCID: PMC10066299
PMID: 36775821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.