1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2023 Jan 27;17:1084769. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2023.1084769. 
eCollection 2023.

Crosstalk between the Rho and Rab family of small GTPases in neurodegenerative 
disorders.

Nik Akhtar S(1), Bunner WP(2), Brennan E(2), Lu Q(1), Szatmari EM(2).

Author information:
(1)The Harriet and John Wooten Laboratory for Alzheimer's and Neurodegenerative 
Diseases Research, Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina University, 
Greenville, NC, United States.
(2)Laboratory of Neuroscience, Department of Physical Therapy, College of Allied 
Health Sciences, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC, United States.

Neurodegeneration is associated with defects in cytoskeletal dynamics and 
dysfunctions of the vesicular trafficking and sorting systems. In the last few 
decades, studies have demonstrated that the key regulators of cytoskeletal 
dynamics are proteins from the Rho family GTPases, meanwhile, the central hub 
for vesicle sorting and transport between target membranes is the Rab family of 
GTPases. In this regard, the role of Rho and Rab GTPases in the induction and 
maintenance of distinct functional and morphological neuronal domains (such as 
dendrites and axons) has been extensively studied. Several members belonging to 
these two families of proteins have been associated with many neurodegenerative 
disorders ranging from dementia to motor neuron degeneration. In this analysis, 
we attempt to present a brief review of the potential crosstalk between the Rab 
and Rho family members in neurodegenerative pathologies such as Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), Huntington disease, and amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS).

Copyright Â© 2023 Nik Akhtar, Bunner, Brennan, Lu and Szatmari.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2023.1084769
PMCID: PMC9911442
PMID: 36779014

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.