1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Jan 27;11:1104725. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1104725. 
eCollection 2023.

Lipid droplets and polyunsaturated fatty acid trafficking: Balancing life and 
death.

Danielli M(1), Perne L(1), Jarc Jovičić E(1), Petan T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Biomedical Sciences, Jožef Stefan Institute, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Erratum in
    Front Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Mar 22;11:1175493. doi: 
10.3389/fcell.2023.1175493.

Lipid droplets are fat storage organelles ubiquitously distributed across the 
eukaryotic kingdom. They have a central role in regulating lipid metabolism and 
undergo a dynamic turnover of biogenesis and breakdown to meet cellular 
requirements for fatty acids, including polyunsaturated fatty acids. 
Polyunsaturated fatty acids esterified in membrane phospholipids define membrane 
fluidity and can be released by the activity of phospholipases A2 to act as 
ligands for nuclear receptors or to be metabolized into a wide spectrum of lipid 
signaling mediators. Polyunsaturated fatty acids in membrane phospholipids are 
also highly susceptible to lipid peroxidation, which if left uncontrolled leads 
to ferroptotic cell death. On the one hand, lipid droplets act as antioxidant 
organelles that control polyunsaturated fatty acid storage in triglycerides in 
order to reduce membrane lipid peroxidation, preserve organelle function and 
prevent cell death, including ferroptosis. On the other hand, lipid droplet 
breakdown fine-tunes the delivery of polyunsaturated fatty acids into metabolic 
and signaling pathways, but unrestricted lipid droplet breakdown may also lead 
to the release of lethal levels of polyunsaturated fatty acids. Precise 
regulation of lipid droplet turnover is thus essential for polyunsaturated fatty 
acid distribution and cellular homeostasis. In this review, we focus on emerging 
aspects of lipid droplet-mediated regulation of polyunsaturated fatty acid 
trafficking, including the management of membrane lipid peroxidation, 
ferroptosis and lipid mediator signaling.

Copyright © 2023 Danielli, Perne, Jarc Jovičić and Petan.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1104725
PMCID: PMC9911892
PMID: 36776554

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.