1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Apr;299(4):103017. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.103017. Epub 2023
 Feb 13.

Crosstalk between protein kinase C α and transforming growth factor β signaling 
mediated by Runx2 in intestinal epithelial cells.

Li X(1), Kaur N(1), Albahrani M(1), Karpf AR(1), Black AR(1), Black JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(2)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA. Electronic address: 
jennifer.black@unmc.edu.

Tight coordination of growth regulatory signaling is required for intestinal 
epithelial homeostasis. Protein kinase C α (PKCα) and transforming growth factor 
β (TGFβ) are negative regulators of proliferation with tumor suppressor 
properties in the intestine. Here, we identify novel crosstalk between PKCα and 
TGFβ signaling. RNA-Seq analysis of nontransformed intestinal crypt-like cells 
and colorectal cancer cells identified TGFβ receptor 1 (TGFβR1) as a target of 
PKCα signaling. RT-PCR and immunoblot analysis confirmed that PKCα positively 
regulates TGFβR1 mRNA and protein expression in these cells. Effects on TGFβR1 
were dependent on Ras-extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK) signaling. 
Nascent RNA and promoter-reporter analysis indicated that PKCα induces TGFβR1 
transcription, and Runx2 was identified as an essential mediator of the effect. 
PKCα promoted ERK-mediated activating phosphorylation of Runx2, which preceded 
transcriptional activation of the TGFβR1 gene and induction of Runx2 expression. 
Thus, we have identified a novel PKCα→ERK→Runx2→TGFβR1 signaling axis. In 
further support of a link between PKCα and TGFβ signaling, PKCα knockdown 
reduced the ability of TGFβ to induce SMAD2 phosphorylation and cell cycle 
arrest, and inhibition of TGFβR1 decreased PKCα-induced upregulation of p21Cip1 
and p27Kip1 in intestinal cells. The physiological relevance of these findings 
is also supported by The Cancer Genome Atlas data showing correlation between 
PKCα, Runx2, and TGFβR1 mRNA expression in human colorectal cancer. PKCα also 
regulated TGFβR1 in endometrial cancer cells, and PKCα, Runx2, and TGFβR1 
expression correlates in uterine tumors, indicating that crosstalk between PKCα 
and TGFβ signaling may be a common mechanism in diverse epithelial tissues.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.103017
PMCID: PMC10036670
PMID: 36791912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.