1. Front Immunol. 2023 Jan 30;14:1062365. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1062365. 
eCollection 2023.

Reprogramming of IL-12 secretion in the PDCD1 locus improves the anti-tumor 
activity of NY-ESO-1 TCR-T cells.

Kim S(1), Park CI(1), Lee S(1), Choi HR(1), Kim CH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Although the engineering of T cells to co-express 
immunostimulatory cytokines has been shown to enhance the therapeutic efficacy 
of adoptive T cell therapy, the uncontrolled systemic release of potent 
cytokines can lead to severe adverse effects. To address this, we 
site-specifically inserted the interleukin-12 (IL-12) gene into the PDCD1 locus 
in T cells using clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats 
(CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9)-based genome editing to achieve 
T-cell activation-dependent expression of IL-12 while ablating the expression of 
inhibitory PD-1.
METHODS: New York esophageal squamous cell carcinoma 1(NY-ESO-1)-specific TCR-T 
cells was investigated as a model system. We generated ΔPD-1-IL-12 -edited 
NY-ESO-1 TCR-T cells by sequential lentiviral transduction and CRISPR knock-in 
into activated human primary T cells.
RESULTS: We showed that the endogenous PDCD1 regulatory elements can tightly 
control the secretion of recombinant IL-12 in a target cell-dependent manner, at 
an expression level that is more moderate than that obtained using a synthetic 
NFAT-responsive promoter. The inducible expression of IL-12 from the PDCD1 locus 
was sufficient to enhance the effector function of NY-ESO-1 TCR-T cells, as 
determined by upregulation of effector molecules, increased cytotoxic activity, 
and enhanced expansion upon repeated antigen stimulation in vitro. Mouse 
xenograft studies also revealed that PD-1-edited IL-12-secreting NY-ESO-1 TCR-T 
cells could eliminate established tumors and showed significantly greater in 
vivo expansion capacity than control TCR-T cells.
DISCUSSION: Our approach may provide a way to safely harness the therapeutic 
potential of potent immunostimulatory cytokines for the development of effective 
adoptive T cell therapies against solid tumors.

Copyright © 2023 Kim, Park, Lee, Choi and Kim.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1062365
PMCID: PMC9923015
PMID: 36793716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.