1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Feb 28;120(9):e2215836120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2215836120. Epub 2023 Feb 21.

Integrating comparative modeling and accelerated simulations reveals 
conformational and energetic basis of actomyosin force generation.

Ma W(1), You S(2), Regnier M(3), McCammon JA(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093.
(2)Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
21205.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093.

Muscle contraction is performed by arrays of contractile proteins in the 
sarcomere. Serious heart diseases, such as cardiomyopathy, can often be results 
of mutations in myosin and actin. Direct characterization of how small changes 
in the myosin-actin complex impact its force production remains challenging. 
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, although capable of studying protein 
structure-function relationships, are limited owing to the slow timescale of the 
myosin cycle as well as a lack of various intermediate structures for the 
actomyosin complex. Here, employing comparative modeling and enhanced sampling 
MD simulations, we show how the human cardiac myosin generates force during the 
mechanochemical cycle. Initial conformational ensembles for different 
myosin-actin states are learned from multiple structural templates with Rosetta. 
This enables us to efficiently sample the energy landscape of the system using 
Gaussian accelerated MD. Key myosin loop residues, whose substitutions are 
related to cardiomyopathy, are identified to form stable or metastable 
interactions with the actin surface. We find that the actin-binding cleft 
closure is allosterically coupled to the myosin motor core transitions and 
ATP-hydrolysis product release from the active site. Furthermore, a gate between 
switch I and switch II is suggested to control phosphate release at the 
prepowerstroke state. Our approach demonstrates the ability to link sequence and 
structural information to motor functions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2215836120
PMCID: PMC9992861
PMID: 36802417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.