1. Front Pediatr. 2023 Feb 3;11:1084336. doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1084336. 
eCollection 2023.

Clinical features and enzyme replacement therapy in 10 children with Fabry 
disease.

Li Q(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Tian M(3), Yang Z(1)(2), Yu L(1)(2), Liu S(1)(2), Wang 
C(1)(2), Wang X(1)(2), Sun S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Nephrology and Rheumatism and Immunology, Shandong 
Provincial Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, 
China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Nephrology and Rheumatism and Immunology, Shandong 
Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, 
China.
(3)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shandong First Medical University, Taian, 
China.

OBJECTIVE: To summarize the clinical features, diagnosis and enzyme replacement 
therapy(ERT) of Fabry disease (FD) in children.
METHODS: The clinical data, laboratory tests, genetic variations and treatment 
of 10 FD children diagnosed in Shandong Provincial Hospital from September 2020 
to June 2022 were retrospectively analyzed.
RESULTS: Among the 10 cases from 6 families, 7 patients were boys of 4 to 13 
years of age, and 3 were girls of 12 to 15 years of age. There were 7 
symptomatic patients, including 6 boys and 1 girl. All 7 patients presented with 
acral neuralgia. Five patients had little or no sweating. Five patients 
presented with cutaneous angiokeratoma. Two patients had abdominal pain. One 
patient developed joint symptoms. Four patients had corneal opacity. One patient 
had hearing loss; one patient had short stature. One patient had mild 
proteinuria and 1 patient had dysplasia of the right kidney with decreased eGFR 
(55.28 ml/min.1.73 m2). The left ventricular mass index was slightly elevated in 
1 patient. Three patients had mild obstructive ventilatory dysfunction; a small 
amount of effusion in the intestinal space of the lower abdomen or mild fatty 
liver was found in 2 patients. Partial empty sella turcica in 1 patient. A total 
of 6 GLA gene variants were detected in 10 children, among which 
C.1059_1061delGAT (p.met353del) was a newly discovered mutation. Five children 
received ERT, of which 4 were treated with agalsidase beta and 1 was treated 
with agalsidase alpha. Only 1 patient had anaphylaxis. Lyso-GL-3 levels 
decreased significantly in the first 3 months of ERT initiation and remained 
relatively stable thereafter in 3 patients. The Lyso-GL-3 level was decreased, 
but renal impairment continued to progress in 1 patient treated with agalsidase 
alpha.
CONCLUSION: The clinical manifestations of FD in childhood are diverse, and it 
is necessary to make a definite diagnosis by combining family history, enzyme 
activity, biomarkers, gene testing and other indicators. Pedigree screening and 
high-risk population screening are helpful for early identification, early 
diagnosis and early treatment. No serious adverse reactions were found during 
the short-term treatment with agalsidase alpha and beta.

© 2023 Li, Wang, Tian, Yang, Yu, Liu, Wang, Wang and Sun.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2023.1084336
PMCID: PMC9936091
PMID: 36816376

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.