1. Clin Med Insights Oncol. 2023 Feb 14;17:11795549231152948. doi: 
10.1177/11795549231152948. eCollection 2023.

Evolving Therapeutic Scenario of Stage III Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.

Baudoux N(1), Friedlaender A(1)(2), Addeo A(1).

Author information:
(1)Oncology Department, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Oncology Service, Clinique Générale Beaulieu, Geneva, Switzerland.

Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related death with an incidence 
that continues to increase in both sexes and all ages. However, 80% to 90% of 
lung cancers are non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and the remaining 10% to 20% 
are small cell lung cancer. Adenocarcinoma is the most common histologic subtype 
of lung cancer worldwide. More frequently, lung cancer diagnosis is made in 
advanced stages. Stage III NSCLC refers to locoregionally advanced disease 
without metastases and represents about 30% NSCLC cases. Despite the absence of 
metastases at diagnosis, the outcome is generally poor. Stage III comprises a 
heterogeneous group and optimal management requires the input of a 
multidisciplinary team. All modalities of oncologic treatment are involved: 
surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and more recently, immunotherapy and 
targeted therapy. We will discuss the different therapeutic options in stage III 
NSCLC, both in operable and inoperable scenarios, and the role of immunotherapy 
and targeted therapy.

© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1177/11795549231152948
PMCID: PMC9932776
PMID: 36818454

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared the following potential 
conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article: NB reports no conflict of interest. AF received, 
outside of the present work, personal fees from Bristol Myers Squibb, Roche 
Holdings AG, Pfizer, Astellas, and Merck Sharp & Dohme. AA reports Consulting or 
advisory role from BMS, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Roche, MSD, Pfizer, 
Eli Lilly, and Astellas, and Speaker bureau from Eli Lilly and AstraZeneca.