1. Front Physiol. 2023 Feb 6;14:1097317. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1097317. 
eCollection 2023.

Candidate genes potentially involved in molting and body size reduction in the 
male of the horned gall aphid, Schlechtendalia chinensis.

Wei H(1), Xu X(1), Feng G(1), Shao S(1), Chen X(1), Yang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Cultivation and Utilization of Resource Insects, Institute 
of Highland Forest Science, Chinese Academy of Forestry, National Forestry and 
Grassland Administration, Kunming, China.

In general, insects grow (increase in body size) through molting. To the 
opposite, the body size of the males of the horned gall aphid, Schlechtendalia 
chinensis, gets smaller after molting and as they age. To understand the 
molecular bases of this rare phenomenon, transcriptomes were generated from 
1-5 days old male and the data were analyzed via a weighted gene co-expression 
network analysis (WGCNA). A total of 15 partitioned modules with different 
topological overlaps were obtained, and four modules were identified as highly 
significant for male body length (p < 0.05). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis suggested that a portion of genes in the four 
modules are likely involved in autophagy and apoptosis. In addition, a total of 
40 hub genes were obtained in the four modules, and among them eight genes were 
highly expressed in males compared to individuals of other generations of S. 
chinensis. These eight genes were associated with autophagy and apoptosis. Our 
results reveal the unique negative growth phenomenon in male S. chinensis after 
molting, and also suggest that the male S. chinensis with no ability to feed 
probably decompose their own substances via autophagy and apoptosis to provide 
energy for life activities such as germ cell development.

Copyright © 2023 Wei, Xu, Feng, Shao, Chen and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1097317
PMCID: PMC9940790
PMID: 36814477

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.