1. Toxins (Basel). 2023 Jan 29;15(2):114. doi: 10.3390/toxins15020114.

Aromatic Residues on the Side Surface of Cry4Ba-Domain II of Bacillus 
thuringiensis subsp. israelensis Function in Binding to Their Counterpart 
Residues on the Aedes aegypti Alkaline Phosphatase Receptor.

Thammasittirong A(1)(2), Thammasittirong SN(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Liberal Arts and Science, Kasetsart 
University, Nakhon Pathom 73140, Thailand.
(2)Microbial Biotechnology Unit, Faculty of Liberal Arts and Science, Kasetsart 
University, Nakhon Pathom 73140, Thailand.

Receptor binding is a prerequisite process to exert the mosquitocidal activity 
of the Cry4Ba toxin of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis. The beta-sheet 
prism (domain II) and beta-sheet sandwich (domain III) of the Cry4Ba toxin have 
been implicated in receptor binding, albeit the precise binding mechanisms of 
these remain unclear. In this work, alanine scanning was used to determine the 
contribution to receptor binding of some aromatic and hydrophobic residues on 
the surface of domains II and III that are predicted to be responsible for 
binding to the Aedes aegypti membrane-bound alkaline phosphatase (Aa-mALP) 
receptor. Larvicidal activity assays against A. aegypti larvae revealed that 
aromatic residues (Trp327 on the β2 strand, Tyr347 on the β3-β4 loop, and Tyr359 
on the β4 strand) of domain II were important to the toxicity of the Cry4Ba 
toxin. Quantitative binding assays using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) showed similar decreasing trends in binding to the Aa-mALP receptor and 
in toxicity of the Cry4Ba mutants Trp327Ala, Tyr347Ala, and Tyr359Ala, 
suggesting that a possible function of these surface-exposed aromatic residues 
is receptor binding. In addition, binding assays of the Cry4Ba toxin to the 
mutants of the binding residues Gly513, Ser490, and Phe497 of the Aa-mALP 
receptor supported the binding function of Trp327, Tyr347, and Tyr359 of the 
Cry4Ba toxin, respectively. Altogether, our results showed for the first time 
that aromatic residues on a side surface of the Cry4Ba domain II function in 
receptor binding. This finding provides greater insight into the possible 
molecular mechanisms of the Cry4Ba toxin.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins15020114
PMCID: PMC9960242
PMID: 36828427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.