1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2023 Feb 8;12(2):350. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics12020350.

Whole-Genome Sequencing Snapshot of Clinically Relevant Carbapenem-Resistant 
Gram-Negative Bacteria from Wastewater in Serbia.

Cirkovic I(1), Muller BH(2), Janjusevic A(3), Mollon P(2), Istier V(4), 
Mirande-Meunier C(4), Brkic S(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Belgrade, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)bioMérieux, R&D Microbiology, Sequencing Platform, F-69280 Marcy-l'Étoile, 
France.
(3)Institute of Virology, Vaccines and Sera "Torlak", 11152 Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)bioMérieux, R&D Microbiology, Strain Collection & Characterisation, F-38390 
La Balme Les Grottes, France.
(5)Institute for Laboratory Diagnostics "Konzilijum", 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.

Wastewater (WW) is considered a source of antibiotic-resistant bacteria with 
clinical relevance and may, thus, be important for their dissemination into the 
environment, especially in countries with poor WW treatment. To obtain an 
overview of the occurrence and characteristics of carbapenem-resistant 
Gram-negative bacteria (CR-GNB) in WW of Belgrade, we investigated samples from 
the four main sewer outlets prior to effluent into international rivers, the 
Sava and the Danube. Thirty-four CR-GNB isolates were selected for antimicrobial 
susceptibility testing (AST) and whole-genome sequencing (WGS). AST revealed 
that all isolates were multidrug-resistant. WGS showed that they belonged to 
eight different species and 25 different sequence types (STs), seven of which 
were new. ST101 K. pneumoniae (blaCTX-M-15/blaOXA-48) with novel plasmid 
p101_srb was the most frequent isolate, detected at nearly all the sampling 
sites. The most frequent resistance genes to aminoglycosides, quinolones, 
trimethroprim-sulfamethoxazole, tetracycline and fosfomycin were aac(6')-Ib-cr 
(55.9%), oqxA (32.3%), dfrA14 (47.1%), sul1 (52.9%), tet(A) (23.5%) and fosA 
(50%), respectively. Acquired resistance to colistin via chromosomal-mediated 
mechanisms was detected in K. pneumoniae (mutations in mgrB and basRS) and P. 
aeruginosa (mutation in basRS), while a plasmid-mediated mechanism was confirmed 
in the E. cloacae complex (mcr-9.1 gene). The highest number of virulence genes 
(>300) was recorded in P. aeruginosa isolates. Further research is needed to 
systematically track the occurrence and distribution of these bacteria so as to 
mitigate their threat.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics12020350
PMCID: PMC9952161
PMID: 36830261

Conflict of interest statement: B.H.M., P.M., V.I., C.M.M. declare being 
employees of bioMérieux S.A.