1. Biomedicines. 2023 Feb 15;11(2):561. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11020561.

Biomedical Advances in ABCA1 Transporter: From Bench to Bedside.

Choi HY(1), Choi S(1), Iatan I(2), Ruel I(1), Genest J(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montr√©al, QC H4A 
3J1, Canada.
(2)Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, Department of Medicine, St. Paul's 
Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6Z 1Y6, Canada.

ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) has been identified as the molecular 
defect in Tangier disease. It is biochemically characterized by absence of 
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) in the circulation, resulting in 
the accumulation of cholesterol in lymphoid tissues. Accumulation of cholesterol 
in arteries is an underlying cause of atherosclerosis, and HDL-C levels are 
inversely associated with the presence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease 
(ASCVD). ABCA1 increases HDL-C levels by driving the generation of new HDL 
particles in cells, and cellular cholesterol is removed in the process of HDL 
generation. Therefore, pharmacological strategies that promote the HDL biogenic 
process by increasing ABCA1 expression and activity have been intensively 
studied to reduce ASCVD. Many ABCA1-upregulating agents have been developed, and 
some have shown promising effects in pre-clinical studies, but no clinical 
trials have met success yet. ABCA1 has long been an attractive drug target, but 
the failed clinical trials have indicated the difficulty of therapeutic 
upregulation of ABCA1, as well as driving us to: improve our understanding of 
the ABCA1 regulatory system; to develop more specific and sophisticated 
strategies to upregulate ABCA1 expression; and to search for novel druggable 
targets in the ABCA1-dependent HDL biogenic process. In this review, we discuss 
the beginning, recent advances, challenges and future directions in ABCA1 
research aimed at developing ABCA1-directed therapies for ASCVD.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11020561
PMCID: PMC9953649
PMID: 36831097

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.