1. Microorganisms. 2023 Feb 5;11(2):404. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms11020404.

Impact of Pomegranate on Probiotic Growth, Viability, Transcriptome and 
Metabolism.

O'Flaherty S(1), Cobian N(1), Barrangou R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food, Bioprocessing & Nutrition Sciences, North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA.

Despite rising interest in understanding intestinal bacterial survival in situ, 
relatively little attention has been devoted to deciphering the interaction 
between bacteria and functional food ingredients. Here, we examined the 
interplay between diverse beneficial Lactobacillaceae species and a pomegranate 
(POM) extract and determined the impact of this functional ingredient on 
bacterial growth, cell survival, transcription and target metabolite genesis. 
Three commercially available probiotic strains (Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM, 
Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus GG and Lactiplantibacillus plantarum Lp-115) were 
used in growth assays and flow cytometry analysis, indicating differential 
responses to the presence of POM extract across the three strains. The inclusion 
of POM extract in the growth medium had the greatest impact on L. acidophilus 
cell counts. LIVE/DEAD staining determined significantly fewer dead cells when 
L. acidophilus was grown with POM extract compared to the control with no POM 
(1.23% versus 7.23%). Whole-transcriptome analysis following exposure to POM 
extract showed markedly different global transcriptome responses, with 15.88% of 
the L. acidophilus transcriptome, 19.32% of the L. rhamnosus transcriptome and 
only 2.37% of the L. plantarum transcriptome differentially expressed. We also 
noted strain-dependent metabolite concentrations in the medium with POM extract 
compared to the control medium for punicalagin, ellagic acid and gallic acid. 
Overall, the results show that POM extract triggers species-specific responses 
by probiotic strains and substantiates the rising interest in using POM as a 
prebiotic compound.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms11020404
PMCID: PMC9964784
PMID: 36838369

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.