1. Sci Rep. 2023 Feb 27;13(1):3326. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-30164-3.

Analgesic effects of a highly selective mPGES-1 inhibitor.

Stewart MJ(1)(2), Weaver LM(1)(2), Ding K(1), Kyomuhangi A(1)(2), Loftin CD(2), 
Zheng F(3)(4), Zhan CG(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Modeling and Biopharmaceutical Center, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Kentucky, 789 South Limestone Street, Lexington, KY, 40536, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Kentucky, 789 South Limestone Street, Lexington, KY, 40536, USA.
(3)Molecular Modeling and Biopharmaceutical Center, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Kentucky, 789 South Limestone Street, Lexington, KY, 40536, USA. 
fzhen2@uky.edu.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Kentucky, 789 South Limestone Street, Lexington, KY, 40536, USA. fzhen2@uky.edu.
(5)Molecular Modeling and Biopharmaceutical Center, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Kentucky, 789 South Limestone Street, Lexington, KY, 40536, USA. 
zhn@uky.edu.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Kentucky, 789 South Limestone Street, Lexington, KY, 40536, USA. zhn@uky.edu.

The growing opioid use and overdose crisis in the US is closely related to the 
abuse of pain medications. Particularly for postoperative pain (POP), ~ 310 
million major surgeries are performed globally per year. Most patients 
undergoing surgical procedures experience acute POP, and ~ 75% of those with POP 
report the severity as moderate, severe, or extreme. Opioid analgesics are the 
mainstay for POP management. It is highly desirable to develop a truly effective 
and safe non-opioid analgesic to treat POP and other forms of pain. Notably, 
microsomal prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) synthase-1 (mPGES-1) was once proposed as a 
potentially promising target for a next generation of anti-inflammatory drugs 
based on studies in mPGES-1 knockouts. However, to the best of our knowledge, no 
studies have ever been reported to explore whether mPGES-1 is also a potential 
target for POP treatment. In this study, we demonstrate for the first time that 
a highly selective mPGES-1 inhibitor can effectively relieve POP as well as 
other forms of pain through blocking the PGE2 overproduction. All the data have 
consistently demonstrated that mPGES-1 is a truly promising target for treatment 
of POP as well as other forms of pain.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-30164-3
PMCID: PMC9971260
PMID: 36849491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.