1. Front Oncol. 2023 Feb 8;13:1051641. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1051641.
eCollection  2023.

A prognostic NAD+ metabolism-related gene signature for predicting response to 
immune checkpoint inhibitor in glioma.

Jiang C(1), Zhou Y(1), Yan L(2), Zheng J(1), Wang X(1), Li J(1), Jiang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Hand Surgery, Wuhan Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) metabolism is involved in a 
series of cancer pathogenesis processes, and is considered a promising 
therapeutic target for cancer treatment. However, a comprehensive analysis of 
NAD+ metabolism events on immune regulation and cancer survival has not yet been 
conducted. Here, we constructed a prognostic NAD+ metabolism-related gene 
signature (NMRGS) associated with immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) efficacy in 
glioma.
METHODS: 40 NAD+ metabolism-related genes (NMRGs) were obtained from the 
Reactome database and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) 
database. Glioma cases with transcriptome data and clinical information were 
obtained from Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas (CGGA) and The Cancer Genome Atlas 
(TCGA). NMRGS was constructed based on the calculated risk score using 
univariate analysis, Kaplan-Meier analysis, multivariate Cox regression, and 
nomogram. This NMRGS was verified in training (CGGA693) and validation (TCGA and 
CGGA325) cohorts. The immune characteristics, mutation profile, and response to 
ICI therapy were subsequently analyzed for different NMRGS subgroups.
RESULTS: Six NAD+ metabolism-related genes, including CD38, nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide kinase (NADK), nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase (NAPRT), 
nicotinamide/nicotinic acid mononucleotide adenylyltransferase 3 (NMNAT3), 
poly(ADP-Ribose) polymerase family member 6 (PARP6), and poly(ADP-Ribose) 
polymerase family member 9 (PARP9), were ultimately used to construct a 
comprehensive risk model for glioma patients. Patients in the NMRGS-high group 
showed a poorer survival outcome than those in the NMRGS-low group. The area 
under curve (AUC) indicated that NMRGS has good potential in glioma prognostic 
prediction. A nomogram with improved accuracy was established based on 
independent prognostic factors (NMRGS score, 1p19q codeletion status, and WHO 
grade). Furthermore, patients in the NMRGS-high group showed a more 
immunosuppressive microenvironment, higher tumor mutation burden (TMB), higher 
human leucocyte antigen (HLA) expression and a more therapeutic response to ICI 
therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: This study constructed a prognostic NAD+ metabolism-related 
signature associated with the immune landscape in glioma, which can be used for 
guiding individualized ICI therapy.

Copyright Â© 2023 Jiang, Zhou, Yan, Zheng, Wang, Li and Jiang.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1051641
PMCID: PMC9945104
PMID: 36845744

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.