1. Int J Surg Pathol. 2023 Dec;31(8):1532-1537. doi: 10.1177/10668969231157780. 
Epub 2023 Feb 28.

Erdheim-Chester Disease Involving the Left Uterine Adnexa: Mimicking an Ovarian 
Carcinoma Clinically.

Zeng Y(1), Wang Q(1), Wang X(1), Jiang X(1), Yao H(1), Tang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Chongqing General Hospital, Chongqing, China.

Erdheim-Chester disease (ECD) is a rare non-Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) 
that results in multiorgan disease involving the skin, bones, lungs, and 
kidneys. Female reproductive system manifestation of ECD was rare. Herein, we 
report a case of ECD involving the left ovary and fallopian tube. A 69-year-old 
woman presented with abdominal pain for 20 days. Magnetic resonance imaging 
revealed a solid and cystic mass on the left pelvic cavity. Histological 
examination revealed ovarian and fallopian tube infiltration by abundant 
histiocytes, with single small nuclei and foamy cytoplasm, reactive small 
lymphocytes, and plasma cells. Based on histopathological and 
immunohistochemical findings of positivity for CD68, CD163, and BRAF V600E and 
negativity for CD1Î± and S100, the molecular finding of BRAF V600E mutation, the 
patient was diagnosed with ECD. Positron emission tomography examination did not 
reveal any other lesions. The patient recovered well 12 months after surgery 
without any treatment. ECD involving the left fallopian tube and ovary was rare 
and needed to be differentiated from LCH, Rosai-Dorfman disease (RDD), juvenile 
xanthogranuloma (JXG), IgG4+-related disease (IgG4+RD), and metastatic signet 
ring cell carcinoma.

DOI: 10.1177/10668969231157780
PMID: 36855299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.