1. BioData Min. 2023 Mar 4;16(1):7. doi: 10.1186/s13040-023-00325-1.

Signature literature review reveals AHCY, DPYSL3, and NME1 as the most recurrent 
prognostic genes for neuroblastoma.

Chicco D(1), Sanavia T(2), Jurman G(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health Policy Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, 
155 College Street, M5T 3M7, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
davidechicco@davidechicco.it.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche, Università di Torino, Via Verdi 8, 10124, 
Turin, Italy.
(3)Data Science for Health Unit, Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Via Sommarive 18, 
38123, Povo (Trento), Italy.

Neuroblastoma is a childhood neurological tumor which affects hundreds of 
thousands of children worldwide, and information about its prognosis can be 
pivotal for patients, their families, and clinicians. One of the main goals in 
the related bioinformatics analyses is to provide stable genetic signatures able 
to include genes whose expression levels can be effective to predict the 
prognosis of the patients. In this study, we collected the prognostic signatures 
for neuroblastoma published in the biomedical literature, and noticed that the 
most frequent genes present among them were three: AHCY, DPYLS3, and NME1. We 
therefore investigated the prognostic power of these three genes by performing a 
survival analysis and a binary classification on multiple gene expression 
datasets of different groups of patients diagnosed with neuroblastoma. Finally, 
we discussed the main studies in the literature associating these three genes 
with neuroblastoma. Our results, in each of these three steps of validation, 
confirm the prognostic capability of AHCY, DPYLS3, and NME1, and highlight their 
key role in neuroblastoma prognosis. Our results can have an impact on 
neuroblastoma genetics research: biologists and medical researchers can pay more 
attention to the regulation and expression of these three genes in patients 
having neuroblastoma, and therefore can develop better cures and treatments 
which can save patients' lives.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13040-023-00325-1
PMCID: PMC9985261
PMID: 36870971

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare they have no conflict of 
interest.