1. Front Psychol. 2023 Feb 16;14:1121908. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1121908. 
eCollection 2023.

Multidimensional proximities and interorganizational coinnovation performance: 
The roles of intraorganizational collaboration network inefficiency.

Xu J(1), Wang C(2), Cui Y(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Economics, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China.
(2)School of Business, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.

In a gradually more interlinked world, the formation of collaborations with 
partners is increasingly regarded as an important driver for generating 
innovation. Although multidimensional proximities are important factors 
influencing interorganizational coinnovation performance, relevant empirical 
studies have not reached consistent conclusions. By focusing on organizational 
dyad and including intraorganizational collaboration network inefficiency as a 
moderating variable, we explore the effects of multidimensional proximities on 
interorganizational coinnovation performance. By reference to 5G patent data 
collected in China between 2011 and 2020, the research results based on the 
quadratic assignment procedure (QAP) model show that geographical proximity, 
cognitive proximity, and institutional proximity all improve interorganizational 
coinnovation performance. In addition, the inefficiency of intraorganizational 
collaboration networks decreases the positive effect of geographical proximity 
but increases the positive effects of cognitive and institutional proximity in 
this context. These findings have both theoretical and practical implications 
for organizational partner selection.

Copyright Â© 2023 Xu, Wang and Cui.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1121908
PMCID: PMC9977826
PMID: 36874794

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.