1. EBioMedicine. 2023 Apr;90:104501. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104501. Epub 2023 
Mar 2.

The link between rheumatic disorders and inborn errors of immunity.

Sogkas G(1), Witte T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Hannover Medical University, 
Hannover, Germany; Hannover Medical School, Cluster of Excellence RESIST (EXC 
2155), Hannover, Germany. Electronic address: sogkas.georgios@mh-hannover.de.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Hannover Medical University, 
Hannover, Germany; Hannover Medical School, Cluster of Excellence RESIST (EXC 
2155), Hannover, Germany.

Inborn errors of immunity (IEIs) are immunological disorders characterized by 
variable susceptibility to infections, immune dysregulation and/or malignancies, 
as a consequence of damaging germline variants in single genes. Though initially 
identified among patients with unusual, severe or recurrent infections, 
non-infectious manifestations and especially immune dysregulation in the form of 
autoimmunity or autoinflammation can be the first or dominant phenotypic aspect 
of IEIs. An increasing number of IEIs causing autoimmunity or autoinflammation, 
including rheumatic disease have been reported over the last decade. Despite 
their rarity, identification of those disorders provided insight into the 
pathomechanisms of immune dysregulation, which may be relevant for understanding 
the pathogenesis of systemic rheumatic disorders. In this review, we present 
novel IEIs primarily causing autoimmunity or autoinflammation along with their 
pathogenic mechanisms. In addition, we explore the likely pathophysiological and 
clinical relevance of IEIs in systemic rheumatic disorders.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104501
PMCID: PMC9996386
PMID: 36870198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.