1. Sci Rep. 2023 Mar 9;13(1):3937. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-30759-w.

Fenretinide inhibits obesity and fatty liver disease but induces Smpd3 to 
increase serum ceramides and worsen atherosclerosis in LDLR(-/-) mice.

Thompson D(1), Mahmood S(2), Morrice N(2), Kamli-Salino S(2), Dekeryte R(2), 
Hoffmann PA(2), Doherty MK(3), Whitfield PD(3)(4), Delibegović M(2), Mody N(5).

Author information:
(1)Aberdeen Cardiovascular and Diabetes Centre, Institute of Medical Sciences, 
School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition, University of Aberdeen, 
Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK. dthompson@abdn.ac.uk.
(2)Aberdeen Cardiovascular and Diabetes Centre, Institute of Medical Sciences, 
School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition, University of Aberdeen, 
Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK.
(3)Lipidomics Research Facility, Department of Diabetes and Cardiovascular 
Science, University of the Highlands and Islands, Inverness, IV2 3JH, UK.
(4)Glasgow Polyomics, University of Glasgow, Garscube Campus, Glasgow, G61 1QH, 
UK.
(5)Aberdeen Cardiovascular and Diabetes Centre, Institute of Medical Sciences, 
School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition, University of Aberdeen, 
Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK. n.mody@abdn.ac.uk.

Fenretinide is a synthetic retinoid that can prevent obesity and improve insulin 
sensitivity in mice by directly altering retinol/retinoic acid homeostasis and 
inhibiting excess ceramide biosynthesis. We determined the effects of 
Fenretinide on LDLR-/- mice fed high-fat/high-cholesterol diet ± Fenretinide, a 
model of atherosclerosis and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). 
Fenretinide prevented obesity, improved insulin sensitivity and completely 
inhibited hepatic triglyceride accumulation, ballooning and steatosis. Moreover, 
Fenretinide decreased the expression of hepatic genes driving NAFLD, 
inflammation and fibrosis e.g. Hsd17b13, Cd68 and Col1a1. The mechanisms of 
Fenretinide's beneficial effects in association with decreased adiposity were 
mediated by inhibition of ceramide synthesis, via hepatic DES1 protein, leading 
to increased dihydroceramide precursors. However, Fenretinide treatment in 
LDLR-/- mice enhanced circulating triglycerides and worsened aortic plaque 
formation. Interestingly, Fenretinide led to a fourfold increase in hepatic 
sphingomyelinase Smpd3 expression, via a retinoic acid-mediated mechanism and a 
further increase in circulating ceramide levels, linking induction of ceramide 
generation via sphingomyelin hydrolysis to a novel mechanism of increased 
atherosclerosis. Thus, despite beneficial metabolic effects, Fenretinide 
treatment may under certain circumstances enhance the development of 
atherosclerosis. However, targeting both DES1 and Smpd3 may be a novel, more 
potent therapeutic approach for the treatment of metabolic syndrome.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-30759-w
PMCID: PMC9998859
PMID: 36894641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.