1. Nutrients. 2023 Feb 22;15(5):1090. doi: 10.3390/nu15051090.

Biomimetic Nanozymes Suppressed Ferroptosis to Ameliorate Doxorubicin-Induced 
Cardiotoxicity via Synergetic Effect of Antioxidant Stress and GPX4 Restoration.

Zhang Y(1)(2), Liu S(3), Peng J(3), Cheng S(3), Zhang Q(1), Zhang N(1), Zhou 
Z(1), Zhang Y(1)(2), Zhao Y(3), Liu T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, 
Tianjin 300211, China.
(2)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Ionic-Molecular Function of Cardiovascular Disease, 
Tianjin Institute of Cardiology, The Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin 300211, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, The Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, 
Tianjin 300211, China.

Mitochondria-dependent ferroptosis plays an important role in the pathogenesis 
of doxorubicin (DOX)-induced cardiotoxicity (DIC), which remains a clinical 
challenge due to the lack of effective interventions. Cerium oxide (CeO2), a 
representative nanozyme, has attracted much attention because of its antioxidant 
properties. This study evaluated CeO2-based nanozymes for the prevention and 
treatment of DIC in vitro and in vivo by adding nanoparticles (NPs), which were 
synthesized by biomineralization, to the culture or giving them to the mice, and 
the ferroptosis-specific inhibitor ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) was used as control. 
The prepared NPs exhibited an excellent antioxidant response and glutathione 
peroxidase 4 (GPX4)-depended bioregulation, with the additional merits of 
bio-clearance and long retention in the heart. The experiments showed that NP 
treatment could significantly reverse myocardial structural and electrical 
remodeling, and reduce myocardial necrosis. These cardioprotective therapeutic 
effects were associated with their ability to alleviate oxidative stress, 
mitochondrial lipid peroxidation, and mitochondrial membrane potential damage, 
with a superior efficiency to the Fer-1. The study also found that the NPs 
significantly restored the expression of GPX4 and mitochondrial-associated 
proteins, thereby restoring mitochondria-dependent ferroptosis. Therefore, the 
study provides some insights into the role of ferroptosis in DIC. It also shows 
that CeO2-based nanozymes could be a promising prevention and treatment 
candidate as a novel cardiomyocyte ferroptosis protector to mitigate DIC and 
improve prognosis and quality of life in cancer patients.

DOI: 10.3390/nu15051090
PMCID: PMC10005374
PMID: 36904089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.