1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Mar 3;15(5):1571. doi: 10.3390/cancers15051571.

Precision Surgery in NSCLC.

Cannone G(1), Comacchio GM(1), Pasello G(2)(3), Faccioli E(1), Schiavon M(1), 
Dell'Amore A(1), Mammana M(1), Rea F(1).

Author information:
(1)Thoracic Surgery Unit, Department of Cardiac, Thoracic Vascular Sciences and 
Public Health, University Hospital of Padova, 35128 Padova, Italy.
(2)Medical Oncology 2, Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV IRCCS, 35128 Padova, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology, University of Padova, 
35128 Padova, Italy.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is still one of the leading causes of death 
worldwide. This is mostly because the majority of lung cancers are discovered in 
advanced stages. In the era of conventional chemotherapy, the prognosis of 
advanced NSCLC was grim. Important results have been reported in thoracic 
oncology since the discovery of new molecular alterations and of the role of the 
immune system. The advent of new therapies has radically changed the approach to 
lung cancer for a subset of patients with advanced NSCLC, and the concept of 
incurable disease is still changing. In this setting, surgery seems to have 
developed a role of rescue therapy for some patients. In precision surgery, the 
decision to perform surgical procedures is tailored to the individual patient; 
taking into consideration not only clinical stage, but also clinical and 
molecular features. Multimodality treatments incorporating surgery, immune 
checkpoint inhibitors, or targeted agents are feasible in high volume centers 
with good results in terms of pathologic response and patient morbidity. Thanks 
to a better understanding of tumor biology, precision thoracic surgery will 
facilitate optimal and individualized patient selection and treatment, with the 
goal of improving the outcomes of patients affected by NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15051571
PMCID: PMC10000462
PMID: 36900362

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.