1. Commun Biol. 2023 Mar 11;6(1):259. doi: 10.1038/s42003-023-04638-z.

Rare sugar L-sorbose exerts antitumor activity by impairing glucose metabolism.

Xu HL(1), Zhou X(1), Chen S(1), Xu S(1), Li Z(2), Nakanishi H(3), Gao XD(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Carbohydrate Chemistry and Biotechnology, Ministry of 
Education, School of Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, 214122, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Carbohydrate Chemistry and Biotechnology, Ministry of 
Education, School of Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, 214122, China. 
lizijie@jiangnan.edu.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Carbohydrate Chemistry and Biotechnology, Ministry of 
Education, School of Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, 214122, China. 
hideki@jiangnan.edu.cn.
(4)Key Laboratory of Carbohydrate Chemistry and Biotechnology, Ministry of 
Education, School of Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, 214122, China. 
xdgao@ipe.ac.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering, Institute of Process 
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China. 
xdgao@ipe.ac.cn.

Rare sugars are monosaccharides with low natural abundance. They are structural 
isomers of dietary sugars, but hardly be metabolized. Here, we report that rare 
sugar L-sorbose induces apoptosis in various cancer cells. As a C-3 epimer of 
D-fructose, L-sorbose is internalized via the transporter GLUT5 and 
phosphorylated by ketohexokinase (KHK) to produce L-sorbose-1-phosphate (S-1-P). 
Cellular S-1-P inactivates the glycolytic enzyme hexokinase resulting in 
attenuated glycolysis. Consequently, mitochondrial function is impaired and 
reactive oxygen species are produced. Moreover, L-sorbose downregulates the 
transcription of KHK-A, a splicing variant of KHK. Since KHK-A is a positive 
inducer of antioxidation genes, the antioxidant defense mechanism in cancer 
cells can be attenuated by L-sorbose-treatment. Thus, L-sorbose performs 
multiple anticancer activities to induce cell apoptosis. In mouse xenograft 
models, L-sorbose enhances the effect of tumor chemotherapy in combination with 
other anticancer drugs. These results demonstrate L-sorbose as an attractive 
therapeutic reagent for cancer treatment.

Â© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-023-04638-z
PMCID: PMC10008635
PMID: 36906698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.