1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Mar 6;15(5):1627. doi: 10.3390/cancers15051627.

Pro-Apoptotic and Anti-Cancer Activity of the Vernonanthura Nudiflora 
Hydroethanolic Extract.

Nadir A(1), Shteinfer-Kuzmine A(2), Pandey SK(2), Ortas J(3), Kerekes D(3), 
Shoshan-Barmatz V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 
84105, Israel.
(2)National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben-Gurion University of 
the Negev, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel.
(3)Sigma Inc., 5701 Dogwood Dr., Orlando, FL 32807, USA.

The mitochondrial voltage-dependent anion channel 1 (VDAC1) protein is involved 
in several essential cancer hallmarks, including energy and metabolism 
reprogramming and apoptotic cell death evasion. In this study, we demonstrated 
the ability of hydroethanolic extracts from three different plants, 
Vernonanthura nudiflora (Vern), Baccharis trimera (Bac), and Plantago major 
(Pla), to induce cell death. We focused on the most active Vern extract. We 
demonstrated that it activates multiple pathways that lead to impaired cell 
energy and metabolism homeostasis, elevated ROS production, increased 
intracellular Ca2+, and mitochondria-mediated apoptosis. The massive cell death 
generated by this plant extract's active compounds involves the induction of 
VDAC1 overexpression and oligomerization and, thereby, apoptosis. Gas 
chromatography of the hydroethanolic plant extract identified dozens of 
compounds, including phytol and ethyl linoleate, with the former producing 
similar effects as the Vern hydroethanolic extract but at 10-fold higher 
concentrations than those found in the extract. In a xenograft glioblastoma 
mouse model, both the Vern extract and phytol strongly inhibited tumor growth 
and cell proliferation and induced massive tumor cell death, including of cancer 
stem cells, inhibiting angiogenesis and modulating the tumor microenvironment. 
Taken together, the multiple effects of Vern extract make it a promising 
potential cancer therapeutic.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15051627
PMCID: PMC10000589
PMID: 36900417

Conflict of interest statement: Juan Ortas and Daniel Kerekes from Sigma Inc. No 
sponsor is received from this company. The current affiliation of Swaroop Kumar 
Pandey is Department of Biotechnology, GLA University, Mathura 281406, India; 
(swaroop.pandey@gla.ac.in). All authors declare no conflicts of interest.