1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Feb 25;15(5):1474. doi: 10.3390/cancers15051474.

A Triphenylphosphonium-Functionalized Delivery System for an ATM Kinase 
Inhibitor That Ameliorates Doxorubicin Resistance in Breast Carcinoma 
Mammospheres.

Stagni V(1)(2), Kaminari A(3), Contadini C(2)(4), Baril√† D(2)(4), Sessa 
RL(1)(2), Sideratou Z(3), Vlahopoulos SA(5), Tsiourvas D(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology, National Research Council 
(CNR), 00183 Rome, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Cell Signaling, IRCCS, Fondazione Santa Lucia, 00179 Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, NCSR ''Demokritos", 15310 Aghia 
Paraskevi, Greece.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Tor Vergata, 00133 Rome, Italy.
(5)Horemeio Research Laboratory, First Department of Paediatrics, N.K.U.A, 11527 
Athens, Greece.

The enzyme ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase is a pluripotent signaling 
mediator which activates cellular responses to genotoxic and metabolic stress. 
It has been shown that ATM enables the growth of mammalian adenocarcinoma stem 
cells, and therefore the potential benefits in cancer chemotherapy of a number 
of ATM inhibitors, such as KU-55933 (KU), are currently being investigated. We 
assayed the effects of utilizing a triphenylphosphonium-functionalized 
nanocarrier delivery system for KU on breast cancer cells grown either as a 
monolayer or in three-dimensional mammospheres. We observed that the 
encapsulated KU was effective against chemotherapy-resistant mammospheres of 
breast cancer cells, while having comparably lower cytotoxicity against adherent 
cells grown as monolayers. We also noted that the encapsulated KU sensitized the 
mammospheres to the anthracycline drug doxorubicin significantly, while having 
only a weak effect on adherent breast cancer cells. Our results suggest that 
triphenylphosphonium-functionalized drug delivery systems that contain 
encapsulated KU, or compounds with a similar impact, are a useful addition to 
chemotherapeutic treatment schemes that target proliferating cancers.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15051474
PMCID: PMC10000448
PMID: 36900267

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.