1. Aging Brain. 2021 Nov 8;1:100024. doi: 10.1016/j.nbas.2021.100024. eCollection
 2021.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and the endocrine system: Are there any 
further ties to be explored?

Mentis AA(1)(2), Bougea AM(3), Chrousos GP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University Research Institute of Maternal and Child Health & Precision 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, "Aghia Sophia" 
Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(2)UNESCO Chair on Adolescent Health Care, National and Kapodistrian University 
of Athens, "Aghia Sophia" Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(3)Memory & Movement Disorders Clinic, 1st Department of Neurology, Aeginition 
Hospital, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 
Athens, Greece.

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) belongs to the family of neurodegenerative 
disorders and is classified as fronto-temporal dementia (FTD), progressive 
muscular atrophy, primary lateral sclerosis, and pseudobulbar palsy. Even though 
endocrine dysfunction independently impacts the ALS-related survival rate, the 
complex connection between ALS and the endocrine system has not been studied in 
depth. Here we review earlier and recent findings on how ALS interacts with 
hormones a) of the hypothalamus and pituitary gland, b) the thyroid gland, c) 
the pancreas, d) the adipose tissue, e) the parathyroid glands, f) the bones, g) 
the adrenal glands, and h) the gonads (ovaries and testes). Of note, endocrine 
issues should always be explored in patients with ALS, especially those with low 
skeletal muscle and bone mass, vitamin D deficiency, and decreased insulin 
sensitivity (diabetes mellitus). Because ALS is a progressively deteriorating 
disease, addressing any potential endocrine co-morbidities in patients with this 
malady is quite important for decreasing the overall ALS-associated disease 
burden. Importantly, as this burden is estimated to increase globally in the 
decades to follow, in part because of an increasingly aging population, it is 
high time for future multi-center, multi-ethnic studies to assess the link 
between ALS and the endocrine system in significantly larger patient 
populations. Last, the psychosocial stress experienced by patients with ALS and 
its psycho-neuro-endocrinological sequelae, including 
hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal dysregulation, should become an area of intensive 
study in the future.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbas.2021.100024
PMCID: PMC9997134
PMID: 36911507