1. Phenomics. 2022 Oct 10;2(6):363-382. doi: 10.1007/s43657-022-00073-y. 
eCollection 2022 Dec.

Skin Microbiome, Metabolome and Skin Phenome, from the Perspectives of Skin as 
an Ecosystem.

Chen H(1), Zhao Q(2)(3), Zhong Q(1), Duan C(4), Krutmann J(3), Wang J(1)(5), Xia 
J(4).

Author information:
(1)Human Phenome Institute, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
200438 China.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Cheeloo College of 
Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, 250012 China.
(3)IUF-Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental Medicine, Düsseldorf, 
D-40225 Germany.
(4)Greater Bay Area Institute of Precision Medicine (Guangzhou), School of Life 
Sciences, Fudan University, Guangzhou, 511458 China.
(5)Research Unit of Dissecting the Population Genetics and Developing New 
Technologies for Treatment and Prevention of Skin Phenotypes and Dermatological 
Diseases (2019RU058), Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Shanghai, 200438 
China.

Skin is a complex ecosystem colonized by millions of microorganisms, including 
bacteria, fungi, and viruses. Skin microbiota is believed to exert critical 
functions in maintaining host skin health. Profiling the structure of skin 
microbial community is the first step to overview the ecosystem. However, the 
community composition is highly individualized and extremely complex. To explore 
the fundamental factors driving the complexity of the ecosystem, namely the 
selection pressures, we review the present studies on skin microbiome from the 
perspectives of ecology. This review summarizes the following: (1) the 
composition of substances/nutrients in the cutaneous ecological environment that 
are derived from the host and the environment, highlighting their proposed 
function on skin microbiota; (2) the features of dominant skin commensals to 
occupy ecological niches, through self-adaptation and microbe-microbe 
interactions; (3) how skin microbes, by their structures or bioactive molecules, 
reshape host skin phenotypes, including skin immunity, maintenance of skin 
physiology such as pH and hydration, ultraviolet (UV) protection, odor 
production, and wound healing. This review aims to re-examine the host-microbe 
interactions from the ecological perspectives and hopefully to give new 
inspiration to this field.

© The Author(s) 2022.

DOI: 10.1007/s43657-022-00073-y
PMCID: PMC9712873
PMID: 36939800

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare no 
conflict.