1. Oncol Lett. 2023 Mar 7;25(4):159. doi: 10.3892/ol.2023.13745. eCollection 2023
 Apr.

Role and therapeutic targeting of glutamine metabolism in non‑small cell lung 
cancer (Review).

Zhou L(1), Zhang Q(2), Zhu Q(2), Zhan Y(3), Li Y(4), Huang X(2).

Author information:
(1)The First Clinical Medical College, Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi 
330036, P.R. China.
(2)The National Engineering Research Center for Bioengineering Drugs and The 
Technologies, Institute of Translational Medicine, Nanchang University, 
Nanchang, Jiangxi 330036, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Medical Center of Anesthesiology and Pain, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang University, Nanchang, 
Jiangxi 330006, P.R. China.

The Warburg effect indicates that cancer cells survive through glycolysis under 
aerobic conditions; as such, the topic of cancer metabolism has aroused 
interest. It is requisite to further explore cancer metabolism, as it helps to 
simultaneously explain the process of carcinogenesis and guide therapy. The 
flexible metabolism of cancer cells, which is the result of metabolic 
reprogramming, can meet the basic needs of cells, even in a nutrition-deficient 
environment. Glutamine is the most abundant non-essential amino acid in the 
circulation, and along with glucose, comprise the two basic nutrients of cancer 
cell metabolism. Glutamine is crucial in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
cells and serves an important role in supporting cell growth, activating signal 
transduction and maintaining redox homeostasis. In this perspective, the present 
review aims to provide a new therapeutic strategy of NSCLC through inhibiting 
the metabolism of glutamine. This review not only summarizes the significance of 
glutamine metabolism in NSCLC cells, but also enumerates traditional glutamine 
inhibitors along with new targets. It also puts forward the concept of 
combination therapy and patient stratification with the aim of comprehensively 
showing the effect and prospect of targeted glutamine metabolism in NSCLC 
therapy. This review was completed by searching for keywords including 
'glutamine', 'NSCLC' and 'therapy' on PubMed, and screening out articles.

Copyright: © Zhou et al.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2023.13745
PMCID: PMC10017915
PMID: 36936031

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.