1. Am J Dermatopathol. 2023 May 1;45(5):311-319. doi:
10.1097/DAD.0000000000002420.  Epub 2023 Mar 20.

Gain of CCND1 May Occur Too Infrequently in Cutaneous Melanoma, and Too Late in 
Melanomagenesis, to Be Diagnostically Useful: Genomic Analysis of 88 Cases.

McFadden JR(1), Chaudhari AS(1), Stevanovic M(2), Tsongalis GJ(2)(3), Hughes 
EG(3), Sriharan A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire; and.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical 
Center, Lebanon, New Hampshire.

Genomic analysis is an important tool in the diagnosis of histologically 
ambiguous melanocytic neoplasms. Melanomas, in contrast to nevi, are 
characterized by the presence of multiple copy number alterations. One such 
alteration is gain of the proto-oncogene CCND1 at 11q13. In melanoma, gain of 
CCND1 has been reported in approximately one-fifth of cases. Exact frequencies 
of CCND1 gain vary by melanoma subtype, ranging from 15.8% for lentigo maligna 
to 25.1% for acral melanoma. We present a cohort of 72 cutaneous melanomas from 
2017-2022 in which only 6 (8.3%) showed evidence of CCND1 gain by chromosomal 
microarray. This CCND1 upregulation frequency falls well below those previously 
published and is significantly lower than estimated in the literature ( P < 
0.05). In addition, all 6 melanomas with CCND1 gain had copy number alterations 
at other loci (most commonly CDKN2A loss, followed by RREB1 gain), and 5 were 
either thick or metastatic lesions. This suggests that CCND1 gene amplification 
may be a later event in melanomagenesis, long after a lesion would be borderline 
or equivocal by histology. Data from fluorescence in situ hybridization, 
performed on 16 additional cutaneous melanomas, further corroborate our 
findings. CCND1 gain may not be a common alteration in melanoma and likely 
occurs too late in melanomagenesis to be diagnostically useful. We present the 
largest chromosomal microarray analysis of CCND1 upregulation frequencies in 
cutaneous melanoma, conjecture 3 hypotheses to explain our novel observation, 
and discuss implications for the inclusion or exclusion of CCND1 probes in 
future melanoma gene panels.

Copyright Â© 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000002420
PMCID: PMC10916931
PMID: 36939129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no relevant conflicts of 
interests.