1. Blood. 2023 Jun 8;141(23):2797-2812. doi: 10.1182/blood.2022017152.

Always stressed but never exhausted: how stem cells in myeloid neoplasms avoid 
extinction in inflammatory conditions.

Zhao HG(1), Deininger M(1).

Author information:
(1)Versiti Blood Research Institute and Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
WI.

Chronic or recurrent episodes of acute inflammation cause attrition of normal 
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) that can lead to hematopoietic failure but they 
drive progression in myeloid malignancies and their precursor clonal 
hematopoiesis. Mechanistic parallels exist between hematopoiesis in chronic 
inflammation and the continuously increased proliferation of myeloid 
malignancies, particularly myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). The ability to 
enter dormancy, a state of deep quiescence characterized by low oxidative 
phosphorylation, low glycolysis, reduced protein synthesis, and increased 
autophagy is central to the preservation of long-term HSCs and likely MPN SCs. 
The metabolic features of dormancy resemble those of diapause, a state of 
arrested embryonic development triggered by adverse environmental conditions. To 
outcompete their normal counterparts in the inflammatory MPN environment, MPN 
SCs co-opt mechanisms used by HSCs to avoid exhaustion, including signal 
attenuation by negative regulators, insulation from activating cytokine signals, 
anti-inflammatory signaling, and epigenetic reprogramming. We propose that new 
therapeutic strategies may be derived from conceptualizing myeloid malignancies 
as an ecosystem out of balance, in which residual normal and malignant 
hematopoietic cells interact in multiple ways, only few of which have been 
characterized in detail. Disrupting MPN SC insulation to overcome dormancy, 
interfering with aberrant cytokine circuits that favor MPN cells, and directly 
boosting residual normal HSCs are potential strategies to tip the balance in 
favor of normal hematopoiesis. Although eradicating the malignant cell clones 
remains the goal of therapy, rebalancing the ecosystem may be a more attainable 
objective in the short term.

Â© 2023 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), 
permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2022017152
PMCID: PMC10315634
PMID: 36947811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.