1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Mar 9:2023.03.08.531742. doi: 
10.1101/2023.03.08.531742.

"Disruption of Golgi markers by two RILP-directed shRNAs in neurons: a new role 
for RILP or a neuron-specific off-target phenotype?".

Yap CC(1), Digilio L(1), McMahon L(1), Winckler B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia, 1340 Jefferson Park 
Avenue, Pinn Hall 3226, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Update in
    J Biol Chem. 2023 Jul;299(7):104916. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104916.

In neurons, degradation of dendritic cargos requires RAB7 and dynein-mediated 
retrograde transport to somatic lysosomes. In order to test if the dynein 
adaptor RILP (RAB-interacting lysosomal protein) mediated the recruitment of 
dynein to late endosomes for retrograde transport in dendrites, we obtained 
several knockdown reagents which had been previously validated in non-neuronal 
cells. We found that striking endosomal phenotypes elicited by one shRILP 
plasmid were not reproduced by another one. Furthermore, we discovered a 
profound depletion of Golgi/TGN markers for both shRILP plasmids. This Golgi 
disruption was only observed in neurons and could not be rescued by 
re-expression of RILP. This Golgi phenotype was also not found in neurons 
treated with siRILP or gRILP/Cas9. Lastly, we tested if a different RAB protein 
that interacts with RILP, namely the Golgi-associated RAB34, might be 
responsible for the loss of Golgi markers. Expression of a dominant-negative 
RAB34 did indeed cause changes in Golgi staining in a small subset of neurons 
but manifested as fragmentation rather than loss of markers. Unlike in 
non-neuronal cells, interference with RAB34 did not cause dispersal of lysosomes 
in neurons. Based on multiple lines of experimentation, we conclude that the 
neuronal Golgi phenotype observed with shRILP is likely off-target in this cell 
type specifically. Any observed disruptions of endosomal trafficking caused by 
shRILP in neurons might thus be downstream of Golgi disruption. Different 
approaches will be needed to test if RILP is required for late endosomal 
transport in dendrites. Cell type-specific off-target phenotypes therefore 
likely occur in neurons, making it prudent to re-validate reagents that were 
previously validated in other cell types.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.03.08.531742
PMCID: PMC10028860
PMID: 36945482

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.