1. SAGE Open Med Case Rep. 2023 Mar 21;11:2050313X231160885. doi: 
10.1177/2050313X231160885. eCollection 2023.

An unusual case of a toddler with Canavan disease with frequent intractable 
seizures: A case report and review of the literature.

Irilouzadian R(1), Goudarzi A(2), Hesami H(3), Sarmadian R(4), Biglari HN(5), 
Gilani A(6).

Author information:
(1)Burn Research Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Iranian Center of Neurological Research, Neuroscience Institute, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(4)Infectious Diseases Research Center, Arak University of Medical Sciences, 
Arak, Iran.
(5)Neurosciences Research Center, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, 
Iran.
(6)Sina Trauma and Surgery Research Center, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Canavan disease is a rare fetal inherited leukodystrophy, caused by accumulation 
of N-acetyl-aspartate in the brain. Here, we report a child presented with 
frequent intractable seizures and visual impairment. A 14-month-old female 
infant with a complaint of the absence of neck holding and generalized 
tonic-clonic seizures was referred to our hospital. Macrocephaly, setting sun 
eyes, tremor, and hypotonia were observed. Funduscopy showed optic atrophy. Our 
patient's flash visual evoked potential showed blindness. Her brain magnetic 
resonance imaging showed diffuse white matter in subcortical, basal ganglia, and 
dorsal pons. Electroencephalography showed diffuse slow and sharp waves. The 
genetic study detected a hemizygous mutation in the aspartoacylase gene. Our 
patient was diagnosed with Canavan disease and began anticonvulsant treatment. 
However, seizures were not under control. Then, her medications were 
discontinued, and clobazam and primidone were administered. In conclusion, 
starting clobazam and primidone may help prevent frequently intractable seizures 
in Canavan disease patients.

Â© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1177/2050313X231160885
PMCID: PMC10034305
PMID: 36968992

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.