1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 9;24(6):5239. doi: 10.3390/ijms24065239.

Unfolding Individual Domains of BmrA, a Bacterial ABC Transporter Involved in 
Multidrug Resistance.

Oepen K(1), Mater V(1), Schneider D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry-Biochemistry, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, 
Hanns-Dieter-Hüsch-Weg 17, 55128 Mainz, Germany.
(2)Institute of Molecular Physiology, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, 
Hanns-Dieter-Hüsch-Weg 17, 55128 Mainz, Germany.

The folding and stability of proteins are often studied via unfolding (and 
refolding) a protein with urea. Yet, in the case of membrane integral protein 
domains, which are shielded by a membrane or a membrane mimetic, urea generally 
does not induce unfolding. However, the unfolding of α-helical membrane proteins 
may be induced by the addition of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). When protein 
unfolding is followed via monitoring changes in Trp fluorescence 
characteristics, the contributions of individual Trp residues often cannot be 
disentangled, and, consequently, the folding and stability of the individual 
domains of a multi-domain membrane protein cannot be studied. In this study, the 
unfolding of the homodimeric bacterial ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter 
Bacillus multidrug resistance ATP (BmrA), which comprises a transmembrane domain 
and a cytosolic nucleotide-binding domain, was investigated. To study the 
stability of individual BmrA domains in the context of the full-length protein, 
the individual domains were silenced by mutating the existent Trps. The 
SDS-induced unfolding of the corresponding constructs was compared to the 
(un)folding characteristics of the wild-type (wt) protein and isolated domains. 
The full-length variants BmrAW413Y and BmrAW104YW164A were able to mirror the 
changes observed with the isolated domains; thus, these variants allowed for the 
study of the unfolding and thermodynamic stability of mutated domains in the 
context of full-length BmrA.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24065239
PMCID: PMC10049088
PMID: 36982314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.