1. J Clin Med. 2023 Mar 8;12(6):2108. doi: 10.3390/jcm12062108.

The Impact of Thrombophilic Factors on Disease Progression in Children with 
Biliary Atresia-A Single-Centre Cohort Study.

Ohlendorf J(1), Kiene H(1), Wiegandt J(1), Karch A(2), Jaeger VK(2), Laue T(1), 
Junge N(1), Mutschler F(1), Goldschmidt I(1), Pfister ED(1), Leiskau C(3), 
Petersen C(4), Madadi-Sanjani O(4), Kuebler JF(4), GÃ¶tz JK(1), Baumann U(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Liver Transplantation, Hanover 
Medical School, 30625 Hanover, Germany.
(2)Institute of Epidemiology and Social Medicine, University of Muenster, 48149 
Muenster, Germany.
(3)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Centre 
Goettingen, Georg August University, 37075 Goettingen, Germany.
(4)Paediatric Surgery, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hanover, Germany.
(5)Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

Epidemiological evidence suggests that thrombophilic factors, including male 
sex, non-O blood type, MTHFRnt677TT mutation, factor V Leiden G1691A mutation, 
and prothrombin G20210A polymorphism, may contribute to the progression of 
fibrosis and occurrence of portal vein thrombosis in liver disease. We 
retrospectively investigated the effect of potentially thrombophilic factors on 
native liver survival as a patient-relevant endpoint of disease progression in a 
cohort of 142 children being followed up for biliary atresia at Hannover Medical 
School from April 2017 to October 2019. No significant association could be 
determined. There was no evidence for relevant differences in native liver 
survival for the Factor V Leiden G1691A mutation (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.86, 95% 
confidence interval [CI] 0.38-1.98, p = 0.73), prothrombin G20210A polymorphism 
(HR = 0.96, 95%CI 0.24-3.65, p = 0.96), non-O blood type (HR = 0.79, 95%CI 
0.51-1.21, p = 0.28) or MTHFRnt677TT mutation (HR = 1.24, 95%CI 0.60-2.56, p = 
0.56). A certain, albeit not strong, evidence of reduced native liver survival 
in male patients after Kasai hepatoportoenterostomy, particularly during the 
first 2000 days (42%; HR = 1.41, 95%CI 0.92-2.18, p = 0.11) was found. All 
children with pre-transplant portal vein thrombosis (n = 7) had non-O blood 
types. Larger multi-centre studies are necessary to show if the male sex or 
other thrombophilic factors could be potentially associated with reduced native 
liver survival.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12062108
PMCID: PMC10059690
PMID: 36983111

Conflict of interest statement: The authors who have taken part in this study 
declared that they do not have anything to disclose regarding conflict of 
interest with respect to this manuscript.