1. Front Microbiol. 2023 Mar 13;14:1112580. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1112580. 
eCollection 2023.

Regulated control of virus replication by 4-hydroxytamoxifen-induced splicing.

Zhao Z(1), Wang B(1), Wu S(1), Zhang Z(1), Chen Y(1), Zhang J(1), Wang Y(1), Zhu 
D(1)(2), Li Y(1), Xu J(1), Hou L(1), Chen W(1).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, Beijing, China.
(2)Qingdao Special Servicemen Recuperation Center of PLA Navy, Qingdao, 
Shandong, China.

Designing a modified virus that can be controlled to replicate will facilitate 
the study of pathogenic mechanisms of virus and virus-host interactions. Here, 
we report a universal switch element that enables precise control of virus 
replication after exposure to a small molecule. Inteins mediate a traceless 
protein splicing-ligation process, and we generate a series of modified 
vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) with intein insertion into the nucleocapsid, 
phosphoprotein, or large RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of VSV. Two recombinant 
VSV, LC599 and LY1744, were screened for intein insertion in the large 
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of VSV, and their replication was regulated in a 
dose-dependent manner with the small molecule 4-hydroxytamoxifen, which induces 
intein splicing to restore the VSV replication. Furthermore, in the presence of 
4-hydroxytamoxifen, the intein-modified VSV LC599 replicated efficiently in an 
animal model like a prototype of VSV. Thus, we present a simple and highly 
adaptable tool for regulating virus replication.

Copyright Â© 2023 Zhao, Wang, Wu, Zhang, Chen, Zhang, Wang, Zhu, Li, Xu, Hou and 
Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1112580
PMCID: PMC10040539
PMID: 36992923

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.