1. Eng Life Sci. 2023 Mar 9;23(4):e2200047. doi: 10.1002/elsc.202200047. 
eCollection 2023 Apr.

Implementation of ubiquitous chromatin opening elements as artificial 
integration sites for CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knock-in in mammalian cells.

Kim SM(1), Lee J(1), Lee JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Science and Technology Ajou University Suwon Republic 
of Korea.

CRISPR/Cas9-mediated targeted gene integration (TI) has been used to generate 
recombinant mammalian cell lines with predictable transgene expression. 
Identifying genomic hot spots that render high and stable transgene expression 
and knock-in (KI) efficiency is critical for fully implementing TI-mediated cell 
line development (CLD); however, such identification is cumbersome. In this 
study, we developed an artificial KI construct that can be used as a hot spot at 
different genomic loci. The ubiquitous chromatin opening element (UCOE) was 
employed because of its ability to open chromatin and enable stable and 
site-independent transgene expression. UCOE KI cassettes were randomly 
integrated into CHO-K1 and HEK293T cells, followed by TI of enhanced green 
fluorescent protein (EGFP) onto the artificial UCOE KI site. The CHO-K1 random 
pool harboring 5'2.2A2UCOE-CMV displayed a significant increase in EGFP 
expression level and KI efficiency compared with that of the control without 
UCOE. In addition, 5'2.2A2UCOE-CMV showed improved Cas9 accessibility in the 
HEK293T genome, leading to an increase in indel frequency and 
homology-independent KI. Overall, this assessment revealed the potential of UCOE 
KI constructs as artificial integration sites in streamlining the screening of 
high-production targeted integrants by mitigating the selection of genomic hot 
spots.

© 2023 The Authors. Engineering in Life Sciences published by Wiley‐VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/elsc.202200047
PMCID: PMC10071570
PMID: 37025191

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.