1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 24;24(7):6116. doi: 10.3390/ijms24076116.

Liquid Biopsy in Endometriosis: A Systematic Review.

Ronsini C(1), Fumiento P(1), Iavarone I(1), Greco PF(2), Cobellis L(1), De 
Franciscis P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Woman, Child and General and Specialized Surgery, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", 80138 Naples, Italy.
(2)Unit of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Woman, Child and Public Health, 
A. Gemelli, IRCCS, University Hospital Foundation, 00168 Rome, Italy.

Despite laparoscopy being a standardized option to diagnose pelvic endometriotic 
implants, non-invasive biomarkers are necessary to avoid the discomfort of 
invasive procedures. Recent evidence suggests a potential role of microRNAs 
(miRNAs) as feasible biomarkers for the early diagnosis of endometriosis. 
Following the recommendations in the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement, we systematically searched PubMed, 
EMBASE, Scopus, Cochrane Library, and Science Direct in January 2023. We 
provided no restriction on the country and year of publication, and considered 
English published articles. We selected studies including patients with 
endometriosis and describing miRNA regulation in the context of endometriosis. 
Overall, 45 studies fulfilled the inclusion criteria, and 2045 patients with 
endometriosis and 1587 controls were screened. Patients were analyzed concerning 
miRNAs expression and sources, stage of disease, and symptoms, and compared to 
controls. Among DEMs, the ones with the widest delta between endometriosis 
patients and controls-Relative Expression â‰¥ 4 Log2(ratio)-were miR-145, miR-191, 
miR-195, miR-21-5p, miR-106b-5p, miR-195-5p, miR-451a, miR-200c, miR-20a-5p, and 
miR-15a-5p. Although the epigenetic regulation is partially unclear, miRNAs are 
valid biomarkers to diagnose endometriotic lesions in symptomatic and 
non-symptomatic women. MiRNAs modulation should be clarified, especially during 
therapies or relapse, to plan targeted management protocols.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24076116
PMCID: PMC10094565
PMID: 37047088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.