1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Mar 29;15(7):2035. doi: 10.3390/cancers15072035.

Multiple Genes with Potential Tumor Suppressive Activity Are Present on 
Chromosome 10q Loss in Neuroblastoma and Are Associated with Poor Prognosis.

Ognibene M(1), De Marco P(1), Amoroso L(2), Cangelosi D(3), Zara F(1), Parodi 
S(4), Pezzolo A(5).

Author information:
(1)U.O.C. Genetica Medica, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 16147 Genova, Italy.
(2)U.O.C. Oncologia Pediatrica, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 16147 Genova, 
Italy.
(3)Unit√† di Bioinformatica Clinica, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 16147 
Genova, Italy.
(4)Direzione Scientifica, IRCCS Giannina Gaslini, 16147 Genova, Italy.
(5)IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 16147 Genova, Italy.

Neuroblastoma (NB) is a tumor affecting the peripheral sympathetic nervous 
system that substantially contributes to childhood cancer mortality. Despite 
recent advances in understanding the complexity of NB, the mechanisms 
determining its progression are still largely unknown. Some recurrent segmental 
chromosome aberrations (SCA) have been associated with poor survival. However, 
the prognostic role of most SCA has not yet been investigated. We examined a 
cohort of 260 NB primary tumors at disease onset for the loss of chromosome 10q, 
by array-comparative genomic hybridization (a-CGH) and Single Nucleotide 
Polymorphism (SNP) array and we found that 26 showed 10q loss, while the others 
234 displayed different SCA. We observed a lower event-free survival for NB 
patients displaying 10q loss compared to patients with tumors carrying other 
SCA. Furthermore, analyzing the region of 10q loss, we identified a cluster of 
75 deleted genes associated with poorer outcome. Low expression of six of these 
genes, above all CCSER2, was significantly correlated to worse survival using in 
silico data from 786 NB patients. These potential tumor suppressor genes can be 
partly responsible for the poor prognosis of NB patients with 10q loss.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15072035
PMCID: PMC10093755
PMID: 37046696

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.