1. Int J Biol Sci. 2023 Mar 27;19(6):1955-1967. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.80401. 
eCollection 2023.

Advances in the multi-omics landscape of follicular lymphoma.

Xu T(1), Zheng Z(1), Zhao W(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, 
National Research Center for Translational Medicine at Shanghai, Ruijin Hospital 
Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is the most common indolent lymphoma originating from 
germinal center B cells. FL represents a clinically and biologically 
heterogeneous disease. Most patients have favorable outcomes, but a subset of 
patients experiences early progression or transformation and has a poor 
prognosis. Abnormalities in FL cells and tumor microenvironment have been 
revealed using multi-omics techniques, including genomic, epigenomic, 
transcriptomic and proteomic analysis. Recurrent somatic gene aberrations mainly 
involve epigenetic modifiers, transcription factors, oncogenic pathways and 
microenvironment modulators. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis show marked 
inter- and intra-patient FL subclone heterogeneity. In addition, a comprehensive 
profile of microenvironmental components is provided, unveiling the crosstalk 
between tumor and microenvironment that induce FL progression and facilitate 
immune escape. Together, these studies provide insights into the mechanisms and 
biomarkers of high-risk FL populations, as well as the potential targeted and 
immunotherapy options. Future research should focus on integrating multi-omics 
aberrations to optimize therapeutic strategies in FL.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.80401
PMCID: PMC10092758
PMID: 37063433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.