1. JBMR Plus. 2023 Feb 16;7(4):e10723. doi: 10.1002/jbm4.10723. eCollection 2023 
Apr.

Gene Therapy to Treat Osteopenia Associated With Chronic Ethanol Consumption and 
Aldehyde Dehydrogenase 2 Deficiency.

Camilleri AE(1), Cung M(2), Hart FM(1), Pagovich OE(1), Crystal RG(1), 
Greenblatt MB(2)(3), Stiles KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine Weill Cornell Medical College New York NY USA.
(2)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Weill Cornell Medical College New York NY 
USA.
(3)Research Division Hospital for Special Surgery New York NY USA.

Aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) deficiency affects 35% to 45% of East Asians 
and 8% of the world population. ALDH2 is the second enzyme in the ethanol 
metabolism pathway. The common genetic variant ALDH2*2 allele has a glutamic 
acid-to-lysine substitution at position 487 (E487K) that reduces the enzyme 
activity, resulting in an accumulation of acetaldehyde after ethanol 
consumption. The ALDH2*2 allele is associated with increased risk of 
osteoporosis and hip fracture. Our prior study showed that administration of an 
adeno-associated virus (AAV) serotype rh.10 gene transfer vector expressing the 
human ALDH2 cDNA (AAVrh.10hALDH2) before initiation of ethanol consumption 
prevented bone loss in ALDH2-deficient homozygous knockin mice carrying the 
E487K mutation (Aldh2 E487K+/+). We hypothesized that AAVrh.10hALDH2 
administration after establishment of osteopenia would be able to reverse bone 
loss due to ALDH2 deficiency and chronic ethanol consumption. To test this 
hypothesis, male and female Aldh2 E487K+/+ mice (n = 6) were given ethanol in 
the drinking water for 6 weeks to establish osteopenia and then administered 
AAVrh.10hALDH2 (1011 genome copies). Mice were evaluated for an additional 
12 weeks. AAVrh.10hALDH2 administration after osteopenia was established 
corrected weight loss and locomotion phenotypes and, importantly, increased 
midshaft femur cortical bone thickness, the most important component of bone in 
the resistance to fractures, and showed a trend toward increased trabecular bone 
volume. AAVrh.10hALDH2 is a promising therapeutic for osteoporosis in 
ALDH2-deficient individuals. © 2023 The Authors. JBMR Plus published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2023 The Authors. JBMR Plus published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbm4.10723
PMCID: PMC10097638
PMID: 37065630

Conflict of interest statement: RGC has equity in and is a consultant to LEXEO 
Therapeutics, and RGC and OEP are participants in a patent disclosure regarding 
gene therapy for ALDH2 deficiency. All other authors state that they have no 
conflicts of interest.