1. Res Sq [Preprint]. 2023 Apr 5:rs.3.rs-2644705. doi:
10.21203/rs.3.rs-2644705/v1.

Dermis resident macrophages orchestrate localized ILC2-eosinophil circuitries to 
maintain their M2-like properties and promote non-healing cutaneous 
leishmaniasis.

Lee SH(1), Kang B(2), Kamenyeva O(3), Ferreira TR(1), Cho K(4), Khillan JS(4), 
Kabat J(3), Kelsall BL(2), Sacks DL(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(3)Biological Imaging Section, Research Technology Branch, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA.
(4)Mouse Genetics and Gene Modification Section, Comparative Medicine Branch, 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.

Update in
    Nat Commun. 2023 Nov 29;14(1):7852. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-43588-2.

Tissue-resident macrophages (TRMs) are critical for tissue homeostasis/repair. 
We previously showed that dermal TRMs produce CCL24 (eotaxin2) which mediates 
their interaction with IL-4 producing eosinophils, required to maintain their 
number and M2-like properties in the TH1 environment of the Leishmania major 
infected skin. Here, we unveil another layer of TRM self-maintenance involving 
their production of TSLP, an alarmin typically characterized as epithelial 
cell-derived. Both TSLP signaling and IL-5+ innate lymphoid cell 2 (ILC2s) were 
shown to maintain the number of dermal TRMs and promote infection. Single cell 
RNA sequencing identified the dermal TRMs as the sole source of TSLP and CCL24. 
Development of Ccl24-cre mice permitted specific labeling of dermal TRMs, as 
well as interstitial TRMs from other organs. Genetic ablation of TSLP from 
dermal TRMs reduced the number of dermal TRMs, and disease was ameliorated. 
Thus, by orchestrating localized type 2 circuitries with ILC2s and eosinophils, 
dermal TRMs are self-maintained as a replicative niche for L. major.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-2644705/v1
PMCID: PMC10104262
PMID: 37066418

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.