1. Skin Res Technol. 2023 Apr;29(4):e13323. doi: 10.1111/srt.13323.

Dermoscopic features associated with 3-GEP PLA: LINC00518, PRAME, and TERT 
expression in suspicious pigmented lesions.

Ludzik J(1), Becker AL(1)(2), Latour E(3), Lee C(4), Witkowski A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, 
Oregon, USA.
(2)John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, 
Hawaii, USA.
(3)Biostatistics Shared Resource, Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & 
Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(4)University of California Riverside School of Medicine, Riverside, California, 
USA.

Utilization of dermoscopy and novel molecular triage technologies augments 
visual triage of pigmented skin lesions, promoting early detection of melanoma. 
One emerging in vivo genomic test, 3-GEP pigmented lesion assay (3-GEP PLA) aids 
in pigmented lesion triage by noninvasively detecting the presence of three 
genes associated with melanoma: LINC00518, PRAME, and TERT. The purpose of our 
retrospective case-control study was to identify dermoscopic features uniquely 
associated with the presence of LINC00518, PRAME, or TERT in the stratum corneum 
as determined by 3-GEP PLA testing. Images of suspicious pigmented lesions that 
had undergone 3-GEP PLA testing and received a definitive positive or negative 
result (n = 393) were evaluated for the presence of specific clinical and 
dermoscopic features associated with melanoma. We found that asymmetry of color 
was a significant predictor for PRAME expression (Odds Ratio (OR) 5.5, 95% 
Confidence Interval (CI) 1.6-34.5, p = 0.004), blue color and negative pigment 
network were significant predictors for LINC00518 expression (adjusted OR 2.7, 
95% CI 1.2-5.5, p = 0.014 and adjusted OR 5.4, 95% CI 1.6-16.9, p = 0.010, 
respectively), and atypical polymorphous vessels present in a pigmented skin 
lesion were a significant predictor for TERT promoter mutations (OR 5.8, 95% CI 
1.3-23.4, p = 0.022). The results presented suggest a hierarchy in the 
significance of these dermoscopic features and may help guide evaluation and 
management of pigmented skin lesions.

© 2023 The Authors. Skin Research and Technology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/srt.13323
PMCID: PMC10234169
PMID: 37083005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Joanna Ludzik completed educational training for 
speakers sponsored by Dermtech Inc. The other authors declare no conflict of 
interest.