1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Apr 12;14(4):899. doi: 10.3390/genes14040899.

Strategies for the Generation of Gene Modified Avian Models: Advancement in 
Avian Germline Transmission, Genome Editing, and Applications.

Kim YM(1), Woo SJ(2), Han JY(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Avinnogen Co., Ltd., Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, Research Institute of Agriculture 
and Life Sciences, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul National 
University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea.

Avian models are valuable for studies of development and reproduction and have 
important implications for food production. Rapid advances in genome-editing 
technologies have enabled the establishment of avian species as unique 
agricultural, industrial, disease-resistant, and pharmaceutical models. The 
direct introduction of genome-editing tools, such as the clustered regularly 
interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) system, into early embryos has 
been achieved in various animal taxa. However, in birds, the introduction of the 
CRISPR system into primordial germ cells (PGCs), a germline-competent stem cell, 
is considered a much more reliable approach for the development of genome-edited 
models. After genome editing, PGCs are transplanted into the embryo to establish 
germline chimera, which are crossed to produce genome-edited birds. In addition, 
various methods, including delivery by liposomal and viral vectors, have been 
employed for gene editing in vivo. Genome-edited birds have wide applications in 
bio-pharmaceutical production and as models for disease resistance and 
biological research. In conclusion, the application of the CRISPR system to 
avian PGCs is an efficient approach for the production of genome-edited birds 
and transgenic avian models.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14040899
PMCID: PMC10137648
PMID: 37107658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.