1. Front Mol Biosci. 2023 Apr 10;10:1165132. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2023.1165132. 
eCollection 2023.

PRIMA-1 inhibits Y220C p53 amyloid aggregation and synergizes with cisplatin in 
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Paz MM(1), Ferretti GDS(2)(3), Martins-Dinis MMC(2), Ferreira BIS(4), 
Faier-Pereira A(4), Barnoud T(3), Moreira OC(4), Silva JL(2), Cordeiro Y(1), 
Rangel LP(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(2)Institute of Medical Biochemistry Leopoldo de Meis, National Institute of 
Science and Technology for Structural Biology and Bioimaging, National Center of 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Jiri Jonas, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC, United States.
(4)Real Time PCR Platform RPT09A, Laboratory of Molecular Virology and 
Parasitology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of cancer-related 
deaths worldwide. Although many therapeutic options are available, several 
factors, including the presence of p53 mutations, impact tumor development and 
therapeutic resistance. TP53 is the second most frequently mutated gene in HCC, 
comprising more than 30% of cases. Mutations in p53 result in the formation of 
amyloid aggregates that promote tumor progression. The use of PRIMA-1, a small 
molecule capable of restoring p53, is a therapeutic strategy to 
pharmacologically target the amyloid state mutant p53. In this study, we 
characterize an HCC mutant p53 model for the study of p53 amyloid aggregation in 
HCC cell lines, from in silico analysis of p53 mutants to a 3D-cell culture 
model and demonstrate the unprecedented inhibition of Y220C mutant p53 
aggregation by PRIMA-1. In addition, our data show beneficial effects of PRIMA-1 
in several "gain of function" properties of mutant-p53 cancer cells, including 
migration, adhesion, proliferation, and drug resistance. We also demonstrate 
that the combination of PRIMA-1 and cisplatin is a promising approach for HCC 
therapy. Taken together, our data support the premise that targeting the 
amyloid-state of mutant p53 may be an attractive therapeutic approach for HCC, 
and highlight PRIMA-1 as a new candidate for combination therapy with cisplatin.

Copyright Â© 2023 Paz, Ferretti, Martins-Dinis, Ferreira, Faier-Pereira, Barnoud, 
Moreira, Silva, Cordeiro and Rangel.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2023.1165132
PMCID: PMC10123287
PMID: 37101558

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.