1. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2023 Apr;13(4):1438-1466. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2022.12.019. 
Epub 2023 Feb 2.

The regulatory mechanisms and inhibitors of isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 in 
cancer.

Liu Y(1), Xu W(2), Li M(1), Yang Y(1), Sun D(1), Chen L(3), Li H(1)(2), Chen 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)Wuya College of Innovation, Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design & 
Discovery, Ministry of Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 
110016, China.
(2)Institute of Structural Pharmacology & TCM Chemical Biology, College of 
Pharmacy, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou 350122, 
China.
(3)The Institute of Rehabilitation Industry, Fujian University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou 350122, China.

Reprogramming of energy metabolism is one of the basic characteristics of cancer 
and has been proved to be an important cancer treatment strategy. Isocitrate 
dehydrogenases (IDHs) are a class of key proteins in energy metabolism, 
including IDH1, IDH2, and IDH3, which are involved in the oxidative 
decarboxylation of isocitrate to yield α-ketoglutarate (α-KG). Mutants of IDH1 
or IDH2 can produce d-2-hydroxyglutarate (D-2HG) with α-KG as the substrate, and 
then mediate the occurrence and development of cancer. At present, no IDH3 
mutation has been reported. The results of pan-cancer research showed that IDH1 
has a higher mutation frequency and involves more cancer types than IDH2, 
implying IDH1 as a promising anti-cancer target. Therefore, in this review, we 
summarized the regulatory mechanisms of IDH1 on cancer from four aspects: 
metabolic reprogramming, epigenetics, immune microenvironment, and phenotypic 
changes, which will provide guidance for the understanding of IDH1 and exploring 
leading-edge targeted treatment strategies. In addition, we also reviewed 
available IDH1 inhibitors so far. The detailed clinical trial results and 
diverse structures of preclinical candidates illustrated here will provide a 
deep insight into the research for the treatment of IDH1-related cancers.

© 2022 Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apsb.2022.12.019
PMCID: PMC10149907
PMID: 37139412

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors declared that they have no 
conflicts of interest.