1. Advers Resil Sci. 2023;4(2):191-210. doi: 10.1007/s42844-023-00089-x. Epub
2023  Mar 23.

Childhood Centeredness is a Broader Predictor of Young Adulthood Mental Health 
than Childhood Adversity, Attachment, and Other Positive Childhood Experiences.

Narayan AJ(1), Frederick DE(2), Merrick JS(1), Sayyah MD(1), Larson MD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Denver, Denver, USA.
(2)Institute for Quantitative Social Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
USA.
(3)The Human Improvement Project, Boulder, USA.

This study introduced the novel concept of Centeredness, a measure of the 
emotional atmosphere of the family of origin and a target adult individual's 
perception of feeling safe, accepted, and supported from childhood primary 
caregivers and other family members. This study developed a Centeredness scale 
for adult respondents and tested hypotheses that higher levels of overall 
Centeredness would predict lower levels of depression and anxiety symptoms; 
suicidal thoughts and behaviors (STBs); and aggressive behavior; and higher 
levels of life satisfaction. Predictive effects of Centeredness were compared 
against attachment-related anxiety and avoidance, and adverse and benevolent 
childhood experiences (ACEs and BCEs). Participants were recruited via the 
Prolific-Academic (Pro-A) survey panel into two large independent samples of US 
young adults aged 19-35 years [Sample 1 (test sample), N = 548, 53.5% female, 
2.2% gender non-conforming, 68.3% White, recruited before the pandemic; Sample 2 
(replication sample), N = 1,198, 56.2% female, 2.3% gender non-conforming, 66.4% 
White; recruited during the pandemic]. Participants completed the novel 
Centeredness scale, which showed strong psychometric properties, and 
standardized, publicly available assessments of childhood experiences and mental 
health outcomes. Centeredness was the only variable that significantly predicted 
each mental health outcome across both samples. BCEs predicted all outcomes 
except aggressive behavior in the test sample. Centeredness and BCEs were also 
the only two variables that significantly predicted a dimensional mental health 
composite in both samples. Neither attachment-related anxiety and avoidance nor 
ACEs were as broadly predictive. The Centeredness scale assesses emotional 
aspects of childhood family relationships with individuals of diverse 
backgrounds and family compositions. Clinical and cultural implications are 
discussed.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material 
available at 10.1007/s42844-023-00089-x.

© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1007/s42844-023-00089-x
PMCID: PMC10033291
PMID: 37139097

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestThe authors declare no 
competing interests.