1. ACS Omega. 2023 Apr 18;8(17):15181-15192. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.3c00170. 
eCollection 2023 May 2.

Characterization and Application of a Synthesized Novel 
Poly(chlorobis(1,10-phenanthroline)resorcinolcobalt(II) chloride)-Modified 
Glassy Carbon Electrode for Selective Voltammetric Determination of Cefadroxil 
in Pharmaceutical Formulations, Human Urine, and Blood Serum Samples.

Kassa A(1)(2), Benor A(3), Tigineh GT(2), Abebe A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Natural and Computational Sciences, Debre 
Markos University, Debre Markos, P.O. Box 269, Ethiopia.
(2)Department of Chemistry, College of Science, Bahir Dar University, Bahir Dar 
H9FX+Q62, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Physics, College of Science, Bahir Dar University, Bahir Dar 
H9FX+Q62, Ethiopia.

Cefadroxil belongs to the β-lactam antibiotics, mainly used for the treatment of 
various bacterial infections, caused by Gram-positive and Gram-negative 
bacteria. However, it is also encountering serious bacterial resistance, 
necessitating continuous monitoring of its level in pharmaceutical and 
biological samples. This study presents a selective, accurate, and precise 
square-wave voltammetric method based on a novel 
poly(chlorobis(1,10-phenanthroline)resorcinolcobalt(II)chloride)-modified glassy 
carbon electrode (poly(CP2RCoC)/GCE) for determination of cefadroxil (CDL). 
UV-vis spectroscopy, FT-IR spectroscopy, metal and halide estimation, CHN 
elemental analysis, and electrolytic conductivity measurement results confirmed 
the synthesis of the title complex modifier. Electrode characterization results 
revealed modification of the surface of the electrode by an electroactive and a 
conductive polymer film (poly(CP2RCoC)/GCE), leading to an improved effective 
electrode surface area. In contrast to the bare electrode, the appearance of an 
irreversible oxidative peak at a much reduced potential with a 7-fold current 
enhancement at poly(CP2RCoC)/GCE showed the catalytic effect of the modifier 
toward oxidation of CDL. The square-wave voltammetric current response of 
poly(CP2RCoC)/GCE showed a linear dependence on the concentration of CDL in the 
range of 1 × 10-7-3.0 × 10-4 M with a detection limit of 4.3 × 10-9. The CDL 
level in the selected two tablet brands was in the range of 97.25-100.00% of 
their labeled values. The spike recovery results in tablet, human blood serum, 
and urine samples were 98.85-101.30, 99.20-100.39, and 98.10-99.99%, 
respectively. Interference recovery results with a less than 4.74% error, lower 
LoD, and wider dynamic range than the previously reported methods validated the 
potential applicability of the present method with excellent accuracy and 
sensitivity based on the novel mixed-ligand complex-modified GCE 
(poly(CP2RCoC)/GCE) for determination of CDL in various real samples with a 
complex matrix.

© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.3c00170
PMCID: PMC10157687
PMID: 37151555

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.