1. JIMD Rep. 2023 Feb 15;64(3):246-251. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12362. eCollection 2023
 May.

Pregnancy, delivery, and postpartum period in infantile liver failure syndrome 
type 2 due to variants in NBAS.

Peters B(1), Wiemers F(2), Lenz D(1), Kölker S(1), Hoffmann GF(1), Köhler S(2), 
Staufner C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Center for Child and 
Adolescent Medicine University of Heidelberg Heidelberg Germany.
(2)Center of Obstetrics and Gynecology University of Marburg Marburg Germany.

Biallelic pathogenic variants in the neuroblastoma amplified sequence (NBAS) 
gene affecting the Sec39 domain are associated with a predominant hepatic 
phenotype named infantile liver failure syndrome type 2 (ILFS2). Individuals are 
at risk of developing life-threatening acute liver failure episodes, most likely 
triggered by febrile infections. Pregnancy, delivery, and the postpartum period 
are well known triggers of decompensation in different inherited metabolic 
diseases and therefore entail a potential risk also for individuals with ILFS2. 
We studied pregnancy, birth, and postpartum period in a woman with ILFS2 
(homozygous for the NBAS variant c.2708 T > G, p.(Leu903Arg)). During two 
pregnancies there were no complications associated with the underlying genetic 
condition. Two healthy boys were born by cesarean section. To reduce the risk of 
fever and febrile infections, we avoided prolonged labor, epidural analgesia, 
and breastfeeding. Maternal body temperature and liver function were closely 
monitored. In case of elevated body temperature, antipyretic treatment 
(acetaminophen, metamizole) was given without delay. Alanine and aspartate 
aminotransferases as well as liver function remained normal throughout the 
observation period. Hence, pregnancy and childbirth are feasible in women with 
ILFS2 under careful monitoring.

© 2023 The Authors. JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12362
PMCID: PMC10159861
PMID: 37151364

Conflict of interest statement: Bianca Peters, Felix Wiemers, Dominic Lenz, 
Stefan Kölker, Georg F. Hoffmann, Siegmund Köhler and Christian Staufner declare 
that they have no conflict of interest.