1. mSphere. 2023 Jun 22;8(3):e0011323. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00113-23. Epub 2023
May  8.

Serum Immune Responses to Group A Streptococcal Antigens following Pharyngeal 
Acquisitions among Children in Cape Town, South Africa.

Salie MT(1), Muhamed B(1)(2), Engel K(1), Rampersadh K(1), Daniels R(1), Mhlanti 
L(1), Penfound TA(2), Sable CA(3), ZÃ¼hlke LJ(4)(5), Dale JB(2), Engel ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (AFROStrep Research Initiative) and Cape Heart 
Institute, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Children's National Health System, Washington, DC, USA.
(4)South African Medical Research Council, Cape Town, South Africa.
(5)Division of Paediatric Cardiology, Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.

There is limited information on the human immune response following infection 
with group A Streptococcus (Strep A). Animal studies have shown, in addition to 
the M protein, that shared Strep A antigens elicit protective immunity. This 
study aimed to investigate the kinetics of antibody responses against a panel of 
Strep A antigens in a cohort of school-aged children in Cape Town, South Africa. 
Participants provided serial throat cultures and serum samples at two-monthly 
follow-up visits. Strep A recovered were emm-typed, and serum samples were 
analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to assess immune responses 
to thirty-five Strep A antigens (10-shared and 25-M peptides). Serologic 
evaluations were performed on serial serum samples from 42 selected participants 
(from 256 enrolled) based on the number of follow-up visits, the frequency of 
visits, and throat culture results. Among these, there were 44 Strep A 
acquisitions, 36 of which were successfully emm-typed. Participants were grouped 
into three clinical event groups based on culture results and immune responses. 
A preceding infection was most convincingly represented by a Strep A-positive 
culture with an immune response to at least one shared antigen and M peptide (11 
events) or a Strep A-negative culture with antibody responses to shared antigens 
and M peptides (9 events). More than a third of participants demonstrated no 
immune response despite a positive culture. This study provided important 
information regarding the complexity and variability of human immune responses 
following pharyngeal acquisition of Strep A, as well as demonstrating the 
immunogenicity of Strep A antigens currently under consideration as potential 
vaccine candidates. IMPORTANCE There is currently limited information regarding 
the human immune response to group A streptococcal throat infection. An 
understanding of the kinetics and specificity of antibody responses against a 
panel of Group A Streptococcus (GAS) antigens will serve to refine diagnostic 
approaches and contribute to vaccine efforts, which together will serve to 
reduce the burden of rheumatic heart disease, a major source of morbidity and 
mortality especially in the developing world. This study, utilizing an 
antibody-specific assay, uncovered three patterns of response profiles following 
GAS infection, among 256 children presenting with sore throat to local clinics. 
Overall, the response profiles were complex and variable. Of note, a preceding 
infection was most convincingly represented by a GAS-positive culture with an 
immune response to at least one shared antigen and M peptide. Also, more than a 
third of participants demonstrated no immune response despite a positive 
culture. All antigens tested were immunogenic, providing guidance for future 
vaccine development.

DOI: 10.1128/msphere.00113-23
PMCID: PMC10286702
PMID: 37154726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare a conflict of interest. 
James B. Dale is the inventor of certain technologies related to the development 
of group A streptococcal vaccines. The intellectual property is held by the 
University of Tennessee Research Foundation.