1. PLoS Pathog. 2023 May 12;19(5):e1011396. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011396. 
eCollection 2023 May.

Upregulation of LAG3 modulates the immune imbalance of CD4+ T-cell subsets and 
exacerbates disease progression in patients with alveolar echinococcosis and a 
mouse model.

Li D(1)(2), Ainiwaer A(1)(2), Zheng X(1)(2), Wang M(1)(2), Shi Y(1)(2), Rousu 
Z(1)(2), Hou X(1)(2), Kang X(1)(2), Maimaiti M(1)(2), Wang H(1)(2)(3), Li J(2), 
Zhang C(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pathogenesis, Prevention and Treatment of High 
Incidence Diseases in Central Asia, Clinical Medicine Institute, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang, China.
(2)Basic Medical College, Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang, China.
(3)Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Echinococcosis, Clinical Medicine Institute, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, and WHO Collaborating 
Centre on Prevention and Case Management of Echinococcosis, Urumqi, Xinjiang, 
China.

Infection with the cestode Echinococcus multilocularis (E. multilocularis) 
causes alveolar echinococcosis (AE), a tumor-like disease predominantly 
affecting the liver but able to spread to any organ. T cells develop functional 
defects during chronic E. multilocularis infection, mostly due to upregulation 
of inhibitory receptors such as T-cell immunoreceptor with immunoglobulin and 
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif domains (TIGIT) and programmed 
death-1 (PD-1). However, the role of lymphocyte activation gene-3 (LAG3), an 
inhibitory receptor, in AE infection remains to be determined. Here, we 
discovered that high expression of LAG3 was mainly found in CD4+ T cells and 
induced regulatory T cells (iTregs) in close liver tissue (CLT) from AE 
patients. In a mouse model of E. multilocularis infection, LAG3 expression was 
predominantly found in T helper 2 (Th2) and Treg subsets, which secreted 
significantly more IL-4 and IL-10, resulting in host immune tolerance and 
disease progression at a late stage. Furthermore, LAG3 deficiency was found to 
drive the development of effector memory CD4+ T cells and enhance the type 1 
CD4+ T-cell immune response, thus inhibiting metacestode growth in vivo. In 
addition, CD4+ T cells from LAG3-deficient mice produced more IFN-γ and less 
IL-4 when stimulated by E. multilocularis protoscoleces (EmP) antigen in vitro. 
Finally, adoptive transfer experiments showed that LAG3-knockout (KO) CD4+ T 
cells were more likely to develop into Th1 cells and less likely to develop into 
Tregs in recipient mice. Our work reveals that high expression of LAG3 
accelerates AE disease progression by modulating the immune imbalance of CD4+ 
T-cell subsets. These findings may provide a novel immunotherapeutic strategy 
against E. multilocularis infection.

Copyright: © 2023 Li et al. This is an open access article distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted 
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author 
and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011396
PMCID: PMC10208502
PMID: 37172058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.