1. Pathologie (Heidelb). 2023 Jul;44(4):240-249. doi: 10.1007/s00292-023-01195-4.
 Epub 2023 May 13.

[The new WHO classification of jaw tumours].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Haefliger S(1), Baumhoer D(2).

Author information:
(1)Knochentumor-Referenzzentrum am Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsspital 
Basel, Universität Basel, Schönbeinstr. 40, 4031, Basel, Schweiz.
(2)Knochentumor-Referenzzentrum am Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsspital 
Basel, Universität Basel, Schönbeinstr. 40, 4031, Basel, Schweiz. 
daniel.baumhoer@usb.ch.

Maxillofacial tumours cover a broad spectrum of lesions, including neoplasms, 
hamartomatous changes and developmental disorders. Since the beginning of 2022, 
a beta version of the 5th edition of the WHO classification for head and neck 
tumours has been available online, and a print version is expected to be 
published in mid-2023. From a conceptual point of view, little has been changed 
compared to the 4th edition; the sort order of lesions is more rigorously 
arranged according to benign and malignant behaviour and identical tumour types 
are no longer described redundantly in different chapters depending on their 
location. The diagnostic criteria are now summarized as "essential" and 
"desirable", and in addition to the clinical features, imaging is now also 
incorporated, providing an interdisciplinary approach to the classification. 
A few new entities are included for the first time. This article gives an 
overview of the main changes introduced in the new WHO classification with 
a special emphasis on fibro-osseous lesions of the craniofacial skeleton.

Publisher: Odontogene Tumoren und Kiefertumoren umfassen ein breites Spektrum an 
Läsionen, darunter Neoplasien, hamartomatöse Veränderungen und 
Entwicklungsstörungen. Seit Anfang 2022 ist eine Beta-Version der 5. Auflage der 
WHO-Klassifikation für Kopf-Hals-Tumoren online verfügbar, die voraussichtlich 
Mitte 2023 auch als Printversion erscheinen wird. Konzeptionell hat sich im 
Vergleich zur 4. Auflage nicht viel verändert. Die Reihenfolge der Läsionen ist 
stringenter nach Dignität geordnet und die gleichen Tumoren werden nicht mehr in 
verschiedenen Kapiteln lokalisationsabhängig mehrfach beschrieben. Diagnostische 
Kriterien werden neu in „essential“ und „desirable“ zusammengefasst. Zusätzlich 
zu den klinischen Aspekten wird nun auch die Bildgebung miteinbezogen und die 
Klassifikation damit interdisziplinär. Vereinzelt sind auch neue Läsionen 
erstmals aufgeführt. Dieser Artikel gibt einen Überblick über die Neuerungen der 
neuen Klassifikation mit einem speziellen Fokus auf die Einteilung der 
fibroossären Kieferläsionen.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00292-023-01195-4
PMCID: PMC10322770
PMID: 37179260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]