1. Cells. 2023 Apr 18;12(8):1178. doi: 10.3390/cells12081178.

Glucocorticoid Hormones as Modulators of the Kynurenine Pathway in Chronic Pain 
Conditions.

Jovanovic F(1), Jovanovic V(2), Knezevic NN(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Merit Health Wesley, Hattiesburg, MS 39402, 
USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Advocate Illinois Masonic Medical Center, 
Chicago, IL 60657, USA.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

The pathogenesis of chronic pain entails a series of complex interactions among 
the nervous, immune, and endocrine systems. Defined as pain lasting or recurring 
for more than 3 months, chronic pain is becoming increasingly more prevalent 
among the US adult population. Pro-inflammatory cytokines from persistent 
low-grade inflammation not only contribute to the development of chronic pain 
conditions, but also regulate various aspects of the tryptophan metabolism, 
especially that of the kynurenine pathway (KP). An elevated level of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines exerts similar regulatory effects on the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, an intricate system of 
neuro-endocrine-immune pathways and a major mechanism of the stress response. As 
the HPA axis counters inflammation through the secretion of endogenous cortisol, 
we review the role of cortisol along with that of exogenous glucocorticoids in 
patients with chronic pain conditions. Considering that different metabolites 
produced along the KP exhibit neuroprotective, neurotoxic, and pronociceptive 
properties, we also summarize evidence rendering them as reliable biomarkers in 
this patient population. While more in vivo studies are needed, we conclude that 
the interaction between glucocorticoid hormones and the KP poses an attractive 
venue of diagnostic and therapeutic potential in patients with chronic pain.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12081178
PMCID: PMC10136661
PMID: 37190087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: V.J. declares a financial relationship with 
Medscape (WebMD) and Mindlance; these companies had no role in the design, 
execution, interpretation, or writing of the study. F.J. and N.N.K. declare no 
conflict of interest.