1. J Med Virol. 2023 May;95(5):e28764. doi: 10.1002/jmv.28764.

Detection of H275Y oseltamivir resistance gene mutation among Influenza 
A(H1N1)pdm09 patients by allelic discrimination real-time RT-PCR.

Krishna S(1), Jayaram A(1), Shetty U(1), Varamballi P(1), Mukhopadhyay C(1), 
Jagadesh A(1).

Author information:
(1)Manipal Institute of Virology, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, 
Karnataka, India.

Influenza viruses can mutate genetically and cause a range of respiratory 
ailments. The H275Y mutation in the neuraminidase (NA) gene reduces the 
effectiveness of oseltamivir, a widely used drug for the treatment of Influenza 
A and B virus infection. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends 
single-nucleotide polymorphism assays to detect this mutation. The present study 
aims to estimate the prevalence of H275Y mutation conferring oseltamivir 
resistance in Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus among hospitalized patients from June 
2014 to December 2021. Following the WHO protocol, allelic discrimination 
real-time RT-PCR was performed for 752 samples. Out of the 752 samples, 1 tested 
positive for Y275 gene mutation by allelic discrimination real-time RT-PCR. In 
samples of years 2020 and 2021, neither the H275 nor Y275 genotype was detected. 
Sequencing of the NA gene of all negative samples showed a mismatch between the 
NA sequence and the probes used in the allelic discrimination assay. Also, Y275 
mutation was detected in only 1 sample from 2020. The prevalence of oseltamivir 
resistance was estimated as 0.27% among the Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 patients 
during 2014-2021. The study highlights that the WHO-recommended probes for 
detecting H275Y mutation may not be useful to detect 2020 and 2021 circulating 
strains of Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09, emphasizing the need for continuous 
monitoring of mutations in the influenza virus.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.28764
PMID: 37212286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]