1. Gastric Cancer. 2023 Sep;26(5):677-690. doi: 10.1007/s10120-023-01402-4. Epub 
2023 May 24.

SPRY4 inhibits and sensitizes the primary KIT mutants in gastrointestinal 
stromal tumors (GISTs) to imatinib.

Li S(1)(2), Zhao S(1), Liang N(1), Zhang S(1), Zhang L(1), Zhou L(3), Liu A(1), 
Cao X(1), Tian J(1), Yu Y(4), Fan Z(1), Xiao K(1), Wang M(1), Zhao H(3), Bai 
R(1), Sun J(5).

Author information:
(1)NHC Key Laboratory of Metabolic Cardiovascular Diseases Research, Science and 
Technology Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Ningxia Medical University, 
Yinchuan, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, 
Yinchuan, China.
(3)Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Ministry of Education, School of 
Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong SAR, China.
(4)Department of Emergency, The General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, 
Yinchuan, China.
(5)NHC Key Laboratory of Metabolic Cardiovascular Diseases Research, Science and 
Technology Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Ningxia Medical University, 
Yinchuan, China. jianmin.sun@nxmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: KIT is frequently mutated in gastrointestinal stromal tumors 
(GISTs), and the treatment of GISTs largely relies on targeting KIT currently. 
In this study, we aimed to investigate the role of sprouty RTK signaling 
antagonist 4 (SPRY4) in GISTs and related mechanisms.
METHODS: Ba/F3 cells and GIST-T1 cell were used as cell models, and mice 
carrying germline KIT/V558A mutation were used as animal model. Gene expression 
was examined by qRT-PCR and western blot. Protein association was examined by 
immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: Our study revealed that KIT increased the expression of SPRY4 in GISTs. 
SPRY4 was found to bind to both wild-type KIT and primary KIT mutants in GISTs, 
and inhibited KIT expression and activation, leading to decreased cell survival 
and proliferation mediated by KIT. We also observed that inhibition of SPRY4 
expression in KITV558A/WT mice led to increased tumorigenesis of GISTs in vivo. 
Moreover, our results demonstrated that SPRY4 enhanced the inhibitory effect of 
imatinib on the activation of primary KIT mutants, as well as on cell 
proliferation and survival mediated by the primary KIT mutants. However, in 
contrast to this, SPRY4 did not affect the expression and activation of 
drug-resistant secondary KIT mutants, nor did it affect the sensitivity of 
secondary KIT mutants to imatinib. These findings suggested that secondary KIT 
mutants regulate a different downstream signaling cascade than primary KIT 
mutants.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggested that SPRY4 acts as negative feedback of 
primary KIT mutants in GISTs by inhibiting KIT expression and activation. It can 
increase the sensitivity of primary KIT mutants to imatinib. In contrast, 
secondary KIT mutants are resistant to the inhibition of SPRY4.

Â© 2023. The Author(s) under exclusive licence to The International Gastric 
Cancer Association and The Japanese Gastric Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1007/s10120-023-01402-4
PMID: 37222910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]