1. Genes (Basel). 2023 May 12;14(5):1074. doi: 10.3390/genes14051074.

TNFα Causes a Shift in Gene Expression of TNFRSF1A and TNFRSF1B Isoforms.

Perik-Zavodskaia O(1), Zhukova J(1), Perik-Zavodskii R(1), Alshevskaya A(1), 
Lopatnikova J(1), Sennikov S(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Federal State Budgetary Scientific 
Institution, Research Institute of Fundamental and Clinical Immunology, 630099 
Novosibirsk, Russia.

Alternative splicing is a part of mRNA processing that expands the diversity of 
proteins encoded by a single gene. Studying the full range of proteins-products 
of translation of alternatively spliced mRNA is extremely important for 
understanding the interactions between receptor proteins and ligands since 
different receptor protein isoforms can provide variation in the activation of 
signaling pathways. In this study, we investigated the expression of isoforms of 
TNFR1 and TNFR2 receptors before and after exposure to TNFα in two cell lines 
that had previously demonstrated diverse effects on cell proliferation under 
TNFα incubation using RT-qPCR. We found that after incubation with TNFα: (1) 
expression of isoform 3 of the TNFRSF1A gene was increased in both cell lines; 
(2) the cell line with increased proliferation, K562, had decreased expression 
of isoforms 1 and 4 of the TNFRSF1A gene and expression of isoform 2 of TNFRSF1B 
gene was absent at all; (3) the cell line with decreased proliferation-MCF-7 had 
significantly increased expression of isoform 2 of TNFRSF1B gene. Thus, we can 
conclude that TNFα exposure to the K562 and MCF-7 cell lines leads to changes in 
the expression of TNFα receptor isoforms, which, in turn, can appear via diverse 
proliferative effects.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14051074
PMCID: PMC10218394
PMID: 37239433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.