1. Plant Physiol. 2023 Aug 31;193(1):736-755. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiad315.

Allelic variation in transcription factor PtoWRKY68 contributes to drought 
tolerance in Populus.

Fang Y(1)(2), Wang D(1)(2), Xiao L(1)(2), Quan M(1)(2), Qi W(1)(2), Song 
F(1)(2), Zhou J(1)(2), Liu X(3), Qin S(1)(2), Du Q(1)(2), Liu Q(4), El-Kassaby 
YA(5), Zhang D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Engineering Research Center of Tree Breeding and Ecological 
Restoration, College of Biological Sciences and Technology, Beijing Forestry 
University, No. 35, Qinghua East Road, Beijing 100083, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Genetics and Breeding in Forest Trees and Ornamental 
Plants, Ministry of Education, College of Biological Sciences and Technology, 
Beijing Forestry University, No. 35, Qinghua East Road, Beijing 100083, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Institute of Forestry and Pomology, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and 
Forestry Sciences, Beijing 100093, People's Republic of China.
(4)The Institute of Agriculture and Food Research, CSIRO Agriculture and Food, 
Black Mountain, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia.
(5)Department of Forest and Conservation Sciences, Faculty of Forestry, Forest 
Sciences Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada.

Drought stress limits woody species productivity and influences tree 
distribution. However, dissecting the molecular mechanisms that underpin drought 
responses in forest trees can be challenging due to trait complexity. Here, 
using a panel of 300 Chinese white poplar (Populus tomentosa) accessions 
collected from different geographical climatic regions in China, we performed a 
genome-wide association study (GWAS) on seven drought-related traits and 
identified PtoWRKY68 as a candidate gene involved in the response to drought 
stress. A 12-bp insertion and/or deletion and three nonsynonymous variants in 
the PtoWRKY68 coding sequence categorized natural populations of P. tomentosa 
into two haplotype groups, PtoWRKY68hap1 and PtoWRKY68hap2. The allelic 
variation in these two PtoWRKY68 haplotypes conferred differential 
transcriptional regulatory activities and binding to the promoters of downstream 
abscisic acid (ABA) efflux and signaling genes. Overexpression of PtoWRKY68hap1 
and PtoWRKY68hap2 in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) ameliorated the drought 
tolerance of two transgenic lines and increased ABA content by 42.7% and 14.3% 
compared to wild-type plants, respectively. Notably, PtoWRKY68hap1 (associated 
with drought tolerance) is ubiquitous in accessions in water-deficient 
environments, whereas the drought-sensitive allele PtoWRKY68hap2 is widely 
distributed in well-watered regions, consistent with the trends in local 
precipitation, suggesting that these alleles correspond to geographical 
adaptation in Populus. Moreover, quantitative trait loci analysis and an 
electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE 
(PtoSVP.3) positively regulates the expression of PtoWRKY68 under drought 
stress. We propose a drought tolerance regulatory module in which PtoWRKY68 
modulates ABA signaling and accumulation, providing insight into the genetic 
basis of drought tolerance in trees. Our findings will facilitate molecular 
breeding to improve the drought tolerance of forest trees.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Society of Plant Biologists.

DOI: 10.1093/plphys/kiad315
PMCID: PMC10469405
PMID: 37247391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interests.