1. Molecules. 2023 May 21;28(10):4220. doi: 10.3390/molecules28104220.

Design, Synthesis, and Antiproliferative Activity of Benzopyran-4-One-Isoxazole 
Hybrid Compounds.

Gupta S(1)(2), Park SE(1), Mozaffari S(1), El-Aarag B(1)(3), Parang K(1), Tiwari 
RK(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Targeted Drug Delivery, Department of Biomedical and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chapman University School of Pharmacy, Harry and Diane 
Rinker Health Science Campus, Irvine, CA 92618-1908, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Hindu College, Sonipat 131001, India.
(3)Biochemistry Division, Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Menoufia 
University, Shebin El-Koom 32512, Egypt.

The biological significance of benzopyran-4-ones as cytotoxic agents against 
multi-drug resistant cancer cell lines and isoxazoles as anti-inflammatory 
agents in cellular assays prompted us to design and synthesize their hybrid 
compounds and explore their antiproliferative activity against a panel of six 
cancer cell lines and two normal cell lines. Compounds 5a-d displayed 
significant antiproliferative activities against all the cancer cell lines 
tested, and IC50 values were in the range of 5.2-22.2 μM against MDA-MB-231 
cancer cells, while they were minimally cytotoxic to the HEK-293 and LLC-PK1 
normal cell lines. The IC50 values of 5a-d against normal HEK-293 cells were in 
the range of 102.4-293.2 μM. Compound 5a was screened for kinase inhibitory 
activity, proteolytic human serum stability, and apoptotic activity. The 
compound was found inactive towards different kinases, while it completely 
degraded after 2 h of incubation with human serum. At 5 μM concentration, it 
induced apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 by 50.8%. Overall, these findings suggest that 
new benzopyran-4-one-isoxazole hybrid compounds, particularly 5a-d, are 
selective anticancer agents, potentially safe for human cells, and could be 
synthesized at low cost. Additionally, Compound 5a exhibits potential anticancer 
activity mediated via inhibition of cancer cell proliferation and induction of 
apoptosis.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules28104220
PMCID: PMC10224329
PMID: 37241960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of this study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.