1. Comput Biol Chem. 2023 Aug;105:107898. doi:
10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2023.107898.  Epub 2023 May 23.

Inflammation inhibitory activity of green tea, soybean, and guava extracts 
during Sars-Cov-2 infection through TNF protein in cytokine storm.

Priyandoko D(1), Widowati W(2), Kusuma HSW(3), Afifah E(3), Wijayanti CR(3), 
Rizal R(4), Sholihah IA(5), Permatasari GW(6), Ramadhani A(7), Utomo DH(8).

Author information:
(1)Biology Study Program, Universitas Pendidikan Indonesia, Indonesia. 
Electronic address: didikpriyandoko@upi.edu.
(2)Faculty of Medical, Maranatha Christian University, Indonesia. Electronic 
address: wahyu_w60@yahoo.com.
(3)Aretha Medika Utama, Biomolecular and Biomedical Research Center, Indonesia.
(4)Aretha Medika Utama, Biomolecular and Biomedical Research Center, Indonesia; 
Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Universitas Indonesia, 
Indonesia.
(5)Aretha Medika Utama, Biomolecular and Biomedical Research Center, Indonesia; 
School of Life Sciences and Technology, Institut Teknologi Bandung, Indonesia.
(6)Indonesian Research Institute for Biotechnology and Bioindustry, Bogor, 
Indonesia.
(7)Indonesian Research Institute for Bioinformatics and Biomolecular, Malang, 
Indonesia.
(8)Department of Biology, Brawijaya University, Malang, Indonesia.

Coronavirus disease is caused by the pathogen severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-Cov-2) known as COVID-19. COVID-19 has caused the deaths of 
6,541,936 people worldwide as of September 27th, 2022. SARS-CoV-2 severity is 
determined by a cytokine storm condition, in which the innate immune system 
creates an unregulated and excessive production of pro-inflammatory such IL-1, 
IL-6, NF Kappa B, and TNF alpha signaling molecules known as cytokines. The 
patient died due to respiratory organ failure and an acute complication because 
of the hyper-inflammation phenomenon. Green tea, soybean, and guava bioactive 
substances are well-known to act as anti-inflammation, and antioxidants become 
prospective COVID-19 illness candidates to overcome the cytokine storm. Our 
research aims to discover the bioactivity, bioavailability, and protein targets 
of green tea, soybean, and guava bioactive compounds as anti-inflammatory agents 
via the TNF inhibition pathway. The experiment uses in silico methods and 
harnesses the accessible datasets. Samples of 3D structure and SMILE identity of 
bioactive compounds were retrieved from the KNApSAck and Dr Duke databases. The 
QSAR analysis was done by WAY2DRUG web server, while the ADME prediction was 
performed using SWISSADME web server, following the Lipinsky rules of drugs. The 
target protein and protein-protein interaction were analyzed using STRING DB and 
Cytoscape software. Lastly, molecular docking was performed using Autodock 4.2 
and visualization with BioVia Discovery Studio 2019. The identified study showed 
the potential of green tea, soybean, and guava's bioactive compounds have played 
an important role as anti-inflammation agents through TNF inhibitor pathway.

Copyright Â© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2023.107898
PMCID: PMC10205135
PMID: 37247574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
state that there is no conflict of interest.