1. JAMA Psychiatry. 2023 Aug 1;80(8):787-795. doi: 
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2023.1321.

Neuroinflammation After COVID-19 With Persistent Depressive and Cognitive 
Symptoms.

Braga J(1)(2)(3), Lepra M(1)(2)(3), Kish SJ(1)(2)(3)(4), Rusjan PM(5)(6), Nasser 
Z(1), Verhoeff N(1), Vasdev N(1)(2)(4), Bagby M(2)(7), Boileau I(1)(2)(3)(4), 
Husain MI(1)(2)(3)(4), Kolla N(1)(2)(3)(4)(8), Garcia A(1)(2), Chao T(9), 
Mizrahi R(5)(6), Faiz K(10), Vieira EL(1)(2), Meyer JH(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Brain Health Imaging Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health Research 
Institute, The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Azrieli Centre for Neuro-Radiochemistry, Campbell Family Mental Health 
Research Institute, The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Douglas Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(7)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Waypoint Centre for Mental Health Care, Penetanguishene, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Mental Health, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(10)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Hamilton Health Sciences, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    JAMA Psychiatry. 2023 Aug 1;80(8):767. doi: 
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2023.0664.

IMPORTANCE: Persistent depressive symptoms, often accompanied by cognitive 
symptoms, commonly occur after COVID-19 illness (hereinafter termed COVID-DC, DC 
for depressive and/or cognitive symptoms). In patients with COVID-DC, gliosis, 
an inflammatory change, was suspected, but measurements of gliosis had not been 
studied in the brain for this condition.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether translocator protein total distribution volume 
(TSPO VT), a marker of gliosis that is quantifiable with positron emission 
tomography (PET), is elevated in the dorsal putamen, ventral striatum, 
prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and hippocampus of persons with 
COVID-DC.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This case-control study conducted at a 
tertiary care psychiatric hospital in Canada from April 1, 2021, to June 30, 
2022, compared TSPO VT of specific brain regions in 20 participants with 
COVID-DC with that in 20 healthy controls. The TSPO VT was measured with 
fluorine F 18-labeled 
N-(2-(2-fluoroethoxy)benzyl)-N-(4-phenoxypyridin-3-yl)acetamide ([18F]FEPPA) 
PET.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The TSPO VT was measured in the dorsal putamen, 
ventral striatum, prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and hippocampus. 
Symptoms were measured with neuropsychological and psychological tests, 
prioritizing outcomes related to striatal function.
RESULTS: The study population included 40 participants (mean [SD] age, 32.9 
[12.3] years). The TSPO VT across the regions of interest was greater in persons 
with COVID-DC (mean [SD] age, 32.7 [11.4] years; 12 [60%] women) compared with 
healthy control participants (mean [SD] age, 33.3 [13.9] years; 11 [55%] women): 
mean (SD) difference, 1.51 (4.47); 95% CI, 0.04-2.98; 1.51 divided by 9.20 
(17%). The difference was most prominent in the ventral striatum (mean [SD] 
difference, 1.97 [4.88]; 95% CI, 0.36-3.58; 1.97 divided by 8.87 [22%]) and 
dorsal putamen (mean difference, 1.70 [4.25]; 95% CI, 0.34-3.06; 1.70 divided by 
8.37 [20%]). Motor speed on the finger-tapping test negatively correlated with 
dorsal putamen TSPO VT (r, -0.53; 95% CI, -0.79 to -0.09), and the 10 persons 
with the slowest speed among those with COVID-DC had higher dorsal putamen TSPO 
VT than healthy persons by 2.3 (2.30 divided by 8.37 [27%]; SD, 2.46; 95% CI, 
0.92-3.68).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this case-control study, TSPO VT was higher in 
patients with COVID-DC. Greater TSPO VT is evidence for an inflammatory change 
of elevated gliosis in the brain of an individual with COVID-DC. Gliosis may be 
consequent to inflammation, injury, or both, particularly in the ventral 
striatum and dorsal putamen, which may explain some persistent depressive and 
cognitive symptoms, including slowed motor speed, low motivation or energy, and 
anhedonia, after initially mild to moderate COVID-19 illness.

DOI: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2023.1321
PMCID: PMC10233457
PMID: 37256580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Drs Vasdev, 
Boileau, and Meyer reported receiving salary support from their respective 
Canada Research Chair awards. Dr Husain reported receiving grants from Compass 
Pathways; holding stock options for advisory board services from Mindset Pharma; 
serving as a consultant for Psyched Therapeutics and Wake Network outside the 
submitted work; and receiving salary support from an Academic Scholars Award 
from the Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto. Dr Kolla reported 
receiving salary support from a Waypoint/University of Toronto Research Chair in 
Forensic Mental Health Science. Prof Meyer reported receiving grants from Sanofi 
outside the submitted work; potentially receiving contracts, which may include 
salary support, from Bristol Myers Squibb and AbbVie; holding stock in Moderna; 
being an inventor on patents for a dietary supplement to prevent postpartum 
sadness; and being an inventor on submitted patents for some blood markers to 
predict inflammation in psychiatric illness; in addition, there is an agreement 
in development with Exceltis to distribute the dietary supplement, which may 
lead to funding. No other disclosures were reported.