1. Front Microbiol. 2023 May 16;14:1153740. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1153740. 
eCollection 2023.

Characterization of two novel colistin resistance gene mcr-1 variants originated 
from Moraxella spp.

Che Y(1)(2), Wu R(1)(2), Li H(1), Wang L(1)(2), Wu X(1)(2), Chen Q(1)(2), Chen 
R(1)(2), Zhou L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Fujian Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Fuzhou, China.
(2)Fujian Animal Diseases Control Technology Development Center, Fuzhou, China.

This study aimed to characterize two novel mcr-1 variants, mcr-1.35 and 
mcr-1.36, which originated from Moraxella spp. that were isolated from diseased 
pigs in China. The Moraxella spp. carrying novel mcr-1 variants were subjected 
to whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and phylogenetic analysis based on the 16S rRNA 
gene. The mcr-1 variants mcr-1.35 and mcr-1.36 were characterized using 
phylogenetic analysis, a comparison of genetic environments, and protein 
structure prediction. The WGS indicated that two novel mcr-1 variants were 
located in the chromosomes of three Moraxella spp. with a genetic environment of 
mcr-1-pap2. In addition to the novel colistin resistance genes mcr-1.35 and 
mcr-1.36, the three Moraxella spp. contained other antimicrobial resistance 
genes, including aac(3)-IId, tet(O), sul2, floR, and blaROB-3. A functional 
cloning assay indicated that either the mcr-1.35 or mcr-1.36 gene could confer 
resistance to colistin in Escherichia coli DH5α and JM109. The nucleotide 
sequences of mcr-1.35 and mcr-1.36 presented 95.33 and 95.33% identities, 
respectively, to mcr-1.1. The phylogenetic analysis showed that mcr-1.35 and 
mcr-1.36 were derived from Moraxella spp. that belonged to subclades that were 
different from those of the mcr-1 variants (mcr-1.1 to mcr-1.34 except mcr-1.10) 
originating from Enterobacteriaceae. The deduced amino acid sequences of 
MCR-1.35 (MCR-1.36) showed 96.67% (96.49%), 82.59% (82.04%), 84.07% (83.52%), 
55.52% (55.17%), 59.75% (59.57%), and 61.88% (61.69%) identity to MCR-1.10, 
MCR-2.2, MCR-6.1, MCR-LIN, MCR-OSL, and MCR-POR, respectively, that originated 
from Moraxella sp. Notably, protein structure alignment showed only a few 
changes in amino acid residues between MCR-1.1 and MCR-1.35, as well as between 
MCR-1.1 and MCR-1.36. In conclusion, this study identified Moraxella spp. 
carrying two novel mcr-1 variants, mcr-1.35 and mcr-1.36, conferring resistance 
to colistin, which were isolated from pig farms in China. In addition, mcr-like 
variants were observed to be located in the chromosomes of some species of 
Moraxella isolated from pig samples.

Copyright © 2023 Che, Wu, Li, Wang, Wu, Chen, Chen and Zhou.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1153740
PMCID: PMC10228737
PMID: 37260682

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.