1. Cell Death Dis. 2023 Jun 3;14(6):347. doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-05860-7.

SLC43A2 and NFκB signaling pathway regulate methionine/cystine 
restriction-induced ferroptosis in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma via a 
feedback loop.

Peng H(1)(2), Yan Y(2), He M(2), Li J(2), Wang L(2), Jia W(2), Yang L(2), Jiang 
J(2), Chen Y(3), Li F(4), Yuan X(5), Pang L(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, 430030, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of Prevention and Treatment of Central Asia High Incidence 
Diseases (First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Shihezi 
University)/Department of Pathology and Key Laboratory for Xinjiang Endemic and 
Ethnic Diseases, Shihezi University School of Medicine, 832002, Shihezi, China.
(3)The People's Hospital of Suzhou National Hi-Tech District, 215010, Suzhou, 
China.
(4)Department of Pathology and Medical Research Center, Beijing Chaoyang 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, 100020, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, 430030, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China. 
yuanxianglin@hust.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, 430030, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China. 
ocean123456@163.com.
(7)NHC Key Laboratory of Prevention and Treatment of Central Asia High Incidence 
Diseases (First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Shihezi 
University)/Department of Pathology and Key Laboratory for Xinjiang Endemic and 
Ethnic Diseases, Shihezi University School of Medicine, 832002, Shihezi, China. 
ocean123456@163.com.
(8)Department of Pathology, Central People's Hospital of Zhanjiang and Zhanjiang 
Central Hospital, Guangdong Medical University, 524000, Zhanjiang, Guangdong, 
China. ocean123456@163.com.

Studies have indicated dietary restriction of methionine/cystine provided a 
therapeutic benefit in diseases such as cancer. However, the molecular and 
cellular mechanisms that underlie the interaction between methionine/cystine 
restriction (MCR) and effects on esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) have 
remained elusive. Here, we discovered the dietary restriction of 
methionine/cystine has a large effect on cellular methionine metabolism as 
assayed in a ECA109 derived xenograft model. RNA-seq and enrichment analysis 
suggested the blocked tumor progression was affected by ferroptosis, together 
with the NFκB signaling pathway activation in ESCC. Consistently, GSH content 
and GPX4 expression were downregulated by MCR both in vivo and in vitro. The 
contents of Fe2+ and MDA were negatively correlated with supplementary 
methionine in a dose-dependent way. Mechanistically, MCR and silent of SLC43A2, 
a methionine transporter, diminished phosphorylation of IKKα/β and p65. Blocked 
NFκB signaling pathway further decreased the expression of SLC43A2 and GPX4 in 
both mRNA and protein level, which in turn downregulated the methionine intake 
and stimulated ferroptosis, respectively. ESCC progression was inhibited by 
enhanced ferroptosis and apoptosis and impaired cell proliferation. In this 
study, we proposed a novel feedback regulation mechanism underlie the 
correlation between dietary restriction of methionine/cystine and ESCC 
progression. MCR blocked cancer progression via stimulating ferroptosis through 
the positive feedback loop between SLC43A2 and NFκB signaling pathways. Our 
results provided the theoretical basis and new targets for ferroptosis-based 
clinical antitumor treatments for ESCC patients.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-023-05860-7
PMCID: PMC10238427
PMID: 37268653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.