1. Int J Pept Res Ther. 2023;29(4):63. doi: 10.1007/s10989-023-10516-3. Epub 2023
 May 30.

Deferoxamine has the Potential to Improve the COVID-19-Related Inflammatory 
Response in Diabetic Patients.

Zeinivand M(1)(2), Sharifi M(3)(4), Hassanshahi G(5)(6), Nedaei SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Kermanshah University of 
Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(2)Student Research Committee, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, 
Kermanshah, Iran.
(3)Physiology Research Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(4)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences Tehran, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Molecular Medicine Research Center, Research Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan, Iran.
(6)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Rafsanjan University of Medical 
Sciences, Rafsanjan, Iran.

The clinical state of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) has been considered a pandemic disease (COVID-19) that is rapidly 
spreading worldwide. Despite all global efforts, the only treatment for COVID-19 
is supportive care and there has been no efficient treatment to fight this 
plague. It is confirmed that patients with chronic diseases such as 
cardiovascular disorder and diabetes; are more vulnerable to COVID-19. In the 
severe type of COVID-19, laboratory findings showed a remarkably enhanced 
C-reactive protein, IL-6 serum, Iron, and ferritin, which suggest an 
inflammatory response. Inflammation results in iron homeostasis imbalance and 
causes iron overload, exacerbating the SARSCOV2 infection. More importantly, 
recent studies have established that SARS-CoV-2 needs iron for viral replication 
and also activation. As a result, managing iron overload in diabetic patients 
with COVID-19 could be an early therapeutic approach to limit the lethal 
inflammatory response of COVID-19. In this review, Deferoxamine (DFO) has been 
proposed as an effective iron chelator agent.

Â© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2023. Springer 
Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights 
to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other 
rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of 
this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and 
applicable law.

DOI: 10.1007/s10989-023-10516-3
PMCID: PMC10227407
PMID: 37273802

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.