1. Molecules. 2023 May 24;28(11):4316. doi: 10.3390/molecules28114316.

Membrane Lipid Derivatives: Roles of Arachidonic Acid and Its Metabolites in 
Pancreatic Physiology and Pathophysiology.

Ortiz-Placín C(1), Castillejo-Rufo A(1), Estarás M(1), González A(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biomarcadores de Patologías Moleculares, Departamento de 
Fisiología, Universidad de Extremadura, 10003 Cáceres, Spain.

One of the most important constituents of the cell membrane is arachidonic acid. 
Lipids forming part of the cellular membrane can be metabolized in a variety of 
cellular types of the body by a family of enzymes termed phospholipases: 
phospholipase A2, phospholipase C and phospholipase D. Phospholipase A2 is 
considered the most important enzyme type for the release of arachidonic acid. 
The latter is subsequently subjected to metabolization via different enzymes. 
Three enzymatic pathways, involving the enzymes cyclooxygenase, lipoxygenase and 
cytochrome P450, transform the lipid derivative into several bioactive 
compounds. Arachidonic acid itself plays a role as an intracellular signaling 
molecule. Additionally, its derivatives play critical roles in cell physiology 
and, moreover, are involved in the development of disease. Its metabolites 
comprise, predominantly, prostaglandins, thromboxanes, leukotrienes and 
hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids. Their involvement in cellular responses leading 
to inflammation and/or cancer development is subject to intense study. This 
manuscript reviews the findings on the involvement of the membrane lipid 
derivative arachidonic acid and its metabolites in the development of 
pancreatitis, diabetes and/or pancreatic cancer.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules28114316
PMCID: PMC10254454
PMID: 37298790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest. All authors contributed to the preparation of this work and revised 
and approved the published version of the manuscript.