1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 May 24;24(11):9184. doi: 10.3390/ijms24119184.

Targeting Stage-Specific Embryonic Antigen 4 (SSEA-4) in Triple Negative Breast 
Cancer by CAR T Cells Results in Unexpected on Target/off Tumor Toxicities in 
Mice.

Pfeifer R(1), Al Rawashdeh W(2), Brauner J(1), Martinez-Osuna M(1), Lock D(1), 
Herbel C(1), Eckardt D(1), Assenmacher M(1), Bosio A(1), Hardt OT(1), Johnston 
ICD(1).

Author information:
(1)Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, 51429 Bergisch Gladbach, Germany.
(2)Ossium Health Inc., Indianapolis, IN 46278, USA.

Due to the paucity of targetable antigens, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) 
remains a challenging subtype of breast cancer to treat. In this study, we 
developed and evaluated a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell-based treatment 
modality for TNBC by targeting stage-specific embryonic antigen 4 (SSEA-4), a 
glycolipid whose overexpression in TNBC has been correlated with metastasis and 
chemoresistance. To delineate the optimal CAR configuration, a panel of 
SSEA-4-specific CARs containing alternative extracellular spacer domains was 
constructed. The different CAR constructs mediated antigen-specific T cell 
activation characterized by degranulation of T cells, secretion of inflammatory 
cytokines, and killing of SSEA-4-expressing target cells, but the extent of this 
activation differed depending on the length of the spacer region. Adoptive 
transfer of the CAR-engineered T cells into mice with subcutaneous TNBC 
xenografts mediated a limited antitumor effect but induced severe toxicity 
symptoms in the cohort receiving the most bioactive CAR variant. We found that 
progenitor cells in the lung and bone marrow express SSEA-4 and are likely 
co-targeted by the CAR T cells. Thus, this study has revealed serious adverse 
effects that raise safety concerns for SSEA-4-directed CAR therapies because of 
the risk of eliminating vital cells with stem cell properties.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24119184
PMCID: PMC10252441
PMID: 37298141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are employed by Miltenyi Biotec.