1. Foods. 2023 May 30;12(11):2197. doi: 10.3390/foods12112197.

Effect of Surfactant Formula on the Film Forming Capacity, Wettability, and 
Preservation Properties of Electrically Sprayed Sodium Alginate Coats.

Deng W(1), Zheng H(1), Zhu Z(1), Deng Y(1), Shi Y(2), Wang D(1), Zhong Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science & Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai 200240, China.
(2)Shanghai SOLON Information Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai 201108, China.

Surfactants are always added to coating formulations to ensure good adhesion of 
edible coatings to a product's surface and to maintain freshness. In this study, 
the effects of the mix surfactants Tween 20 and Span 80 with different 
hydrophile-lipophile balance (HLB) values on the film-forming ability, 
wettability, and preservation capacity of blueberry sodium alginate coating were 
investigated. The results indicated that Tween 20 obviously ensured favorable 
wettability and improved the uniformity and mechanical properties of the 
resulting film. While the addition of Span 80 reduced the mean particle size of 
the coating, enhanced the water resistance of the film, and helped to reduce 
blueberry weight loss. A sodium alginate coating with low viscosity and medium 
HLB could better inhibit the galactose, sucrose, and linoleic acid metabolism of 
blueberries, reduce the consumption of phenols, promote the accumulation of 
flavonoids, and thus display superior coating performance. In summary, sodium 
alginate coating with medium HLB had comprehensive advantages in film-forming 
ability and wettability and was conducive to the fresh-keeping role.

DOI: 10.3390/foods12112197
PMCID: PMC10252690
PMID: 37297442

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper. All authors have read and agreed 
to the published version of the manuscript.