1. Sci Rep. 2023 Jun 22;13(1):10148. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-36021-7.

Enteral administration of the protease inhibitor gabexate mesilate preserves 
vascular function in experimental trauma/hemorrhagic shock.

J D Moreira N(1), Dos Santos F(2), Li JB(3), Aletti F(4), Irigoyen MCC(5), 
Kistler EB(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Instituto do Coração, Hospital das ClínicasFaculdade de Medicina, 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. nathaliajuocys@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(4)Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São José dos Campos, Brazil.
(5)Instituto do Coração, Hospital das ClínicasFaculdade de Medicina, 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA, USA.

Preserving vascular function is crucial for preventing multiorgan failure and 
death in ischemic and low-pressure states such as trauma/hemorrhagic shock 
(T/HS). It has recently been reported that inhibiting circulating proteases 
released from the bowel to the circulation during T/HS may preserve vascular 
function and improve outcomes following T/HS. This study aimed to evaluate the 
role of the serine protease inhibitor gabexate mesilate (GM) in preserving 
vascular function during T/HS when given enterally. We studied the vascular 
reactivity of mesenteric arteries from male Wistar rats treated with enteral GM 
(10 mg/kg) (GM-treated, n = 6) or control (Shock-control, n = 6) following 
(T/HS) using pressure myography. Concentration-response curves of 
endothelial-dependent and endothelial-independent agonists (e.g., acetylcholine, 
sodium nitroprusside) ranging from 10-10 to 10-5 M were performed. In a second 
set of experiments, ex-vivo arteries from healthy rats were perfused with plasma 
from shocked animals from both groups and vascular performance was similarly 
measured. Arteries from the GM-treated group demonstrated a preserved 
concentration-response curve to the α1 adrenergic agonist phenylephrine compared 
to arteries from Shock-control animals (- logEC50: - 5.73 ± 0.25 vs. 
- 6.48 ± 0.2, Shock-control vs. GM-treated, p = 0.04). When perfused with plasma 
from GM-treated rats, healthy arteries exhibited an even greater constriction 
and sensitivity to phenylephrine (- logEC50: - 6.62 ± 0.21 vs. - 7.13 ± 0.21, 
Shock-control vs. GM-treated, p = 0.02). Enteral GM also preserved the 
endothelium-dependent vascular response to agonists following T/HS and limited 
syndecan-1 shedding as a marker of glycocalyx compromise (41.84 ± 9 vs. 
17.63 ± 3.97 ng/mL, Shock-control vs. GM-treated, p = 0.02). Syndecan-1 cleavage 
was correlated with plasma trypsin-like activity (r2 = 0.9611). Enteral gabexate 
mesilate was able to maintain vascular function in experimental T/HS, which was 
reflected by improved hemodynamics (mean arterial pressure 50.39 ± 7.91 vs. 
64.95 ± 3.43 mmHg, Shock-control vs. GM treated, p = 0.0001). Enteral serine 
protease inhibition may be a potential therapeutic intervention in the treatment 
of T/HS.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-36021-7
PMCID: PMC10287748
PMID: 37349360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.