1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Aug;299(8):104962. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104962. Epub 2023
 Jun 23.

The collagen ColQ binds to LRP4 and regulates the activation of the 
Muscle-Specific Kinase-LRP4 receptor complex by agrin at the neuromuscular 
junction.

Uyen Dao TM(1), Barbeau S(1), Messéant J(1), Della-Gaspera B(2), Bouceba T(3), 
Semprez F(1), Legay C(1), Dobbertin A(4).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris Cité, CNRS, Saints-Pères Paris Institute for the 
Neurosciences, Paris, France.
(2)Université Paris Cité, INSERM UMR-S 1124, Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne Université, CNRS, IBPS, Protein Engineering Platform, Paris, France.
(4)Université Paris Cité, CNRS, Saints-Pères Paris Institute for the 
Neurosciences, Paris, France. Electronic address: 
alexandre.dobbertin@u-paris.fr.

Collagen Q (ColQ) is a nonfibrillar collagen that plays a crucial role at the 
vertebrate neuromuscular junction (NMJ) by anchoring acetylcholinesterase to the 
synapse. ColQ also functions in signaling, as it regulates acetylcholine 
receptor clustering and synaptic gene expression, in a manner dependent on 
muscle-specific kinase (MuSK), a key protein in NMJ formation and maintenance. 
MuSK forms a complex with low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4 
(LRP4), its coreceptor for the proteoglycan agrin at the NMJ. Previous studies 
suggested that ColQ also interacts with MuSK. However, the molecular mechanisms 
underlying ColQ functions and ColQ-MuSK interaction have not been fully 
elucidated. Here, we investigated whether ColQ binds directly to MuSK and/or 
LRP4 and whether it modulates agrin-mediated MuSK-LRP4 activation. Using 
coimmunoprecipitation, pull-down, plate-binding assays, and surface plasmon 
resonance, we show that ColQ binds directly to LRP4 but not to MuSK and that 
ColQ interacts indirectly with MuSK through LRP4. In addition, we show that the 
LRP4 N-terminal region, which contains the agrin-binding sites, is also crucial 
for ColQ binding to LRP4. Moreover, ColQ-LRP4 interaction was reduced in the 
presence of agrin, suggesting that agrin and ColQ compete for binding to LRP4. 
Strikingly, we reveal ColQ has two opposing effects on agrin-induced MuSK-LRP4 
signaling: it constitutively reduces MuSK phosphorylation levels in 
agrin-stimulated myotubes but concomitantly increases MuSK accumulation at the 
muscle cell surface. Our results identify LRP4 as a major receptor of ColQ and 
provide new insights into mechanisms of ColQ signaling and acetylcholinesterase 
anchoring at the NMJ.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104962
PMCID: PMC10382678
PMID: 37356721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.