1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2023 Jun 23;19(6):e1010459. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010459.  eCollection 2023 Jun.

Community detection in empirical kinase networks identifies new potential 
members of signalling pathways.

Basanta CLAC(1), Bazzi M(2)(3), Hijazi M(1), Bessant C(3)(4), Cutillas PR(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Cell signaling and Proteomics Group, Centre for Genomics and Computational 
Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Warwick Mathematics Institute, University of Warwick, Coventry, United 
Kingdom.
(3)The Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(4)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, United Kingdom.

Phosphoproteomics allows one to measure the activity of kinases that drive the 
fluxes of signal transduction pathways involved in biological processes such as 
immune function, senescence and cell growth. However, deriving knowledge of 
signalling network circuitry from these data is challenging due to a scarcity of 
phosphorylation sites that define kinase-kinase relationships. To address this 
issue, we previously identified around 6,000 phosphorylation sites as markers of 
kinase-kinase relationships (that may be conceptualised as network edges), from 
which empirical cell-model-specific weighted kinase networks may be 
reconstructed. Here, we assess whether the application of community detection 
algorithms to such networks can identify new components linked to canonical 
signalling pathways. Phosphoproteomics data from acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) 
cells treated separately with PI3K, AKT, MEK and ERK inhibitors were used to 
reconstruct individual kinase networks. We used modularity maximisation to 
detect communities in each network, and selected the community containing the 
main target of the inhibitor used to treat cells. These analyses returned 
communities that contained known canonical signalling components. Interestingly, 
in addition to canonical PI3K/AKT/mTOR members, the community assignments 
returned TTK (also known as MPS1) as a likely component of PI3K/AKT/mTOR 
signalling. We drew similar insights from an external phosphoproteomics dataset 
from breast cancer cells treated with rapamycin and oestrogen. We confirmed this 
observation with wet-lab laboratory experiments showing that TTK phosphorylation 
was decreased in AML cells treated with AKT and MTOR inhibitors. This study 
illustrates the application of community detection algorithms to the analysis of 
empirical kinase networks to uncover new members linked to canonical signalling 
pathways.

Copyright: © 2023 Basanta et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010459
PMCID: PMC10325051
PMID: 37352361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests:P.R.C. is academic 
co-founder of Kinomica Ltd.