1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2023 Sep;21(9):1860-1872. doi: 10.1111/pbi.14098. Epub
2023  Jun 26.

A key to totipotency: Wuschel-like homeobox 2a unlocks embryogenic culture 
response in maize (Zea mays L.).

McFarland FL(1)(2), Collier R(1), Walter N(1), Martinell B(1), Kaeppler 
SM(1)(2), Kaeppler HF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agronomy, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Wisconsin Crop Innovation Center, University of Wisconsin, Middleton, WI, 
USA.

The ability of plant somatic cells to dedifferentiate, form somatic embryos and 
regenerate whole plants in vitro has been harnessed for both clonal propagation 
and as a key component of plant genetic engineering systems. Embryogenic culture 
response is significantly limited, however, by plant genotype in most species. 
This impedes advancements in both plant transformation-based functional genomics 
research and crop improvement efforts. We utilized natural variation among maize 
inbred lines to genetically map somatic embryo generation potential in tissue 
culture and identify candidate genes underlying totipotency. Using a series of 
maize lines derived from crosses involving the culturable parent A188 and the 
non-responsive parent B73, we identified a region on chromosome 3 associated 
with embryogenic culture response and focused on three candidate genes within 
the region based on genetic position and expression pattern. Two candidate genes 
showed no effect when ectopically expressed in B73, but the gene Wox2a was found 
to induce somatic embryogenesis and embryogenic callus proliferation. Transgenic 
B73 cells with strong constitutive expression of the B73 and A188 coding 
sequences of Wox2a were found to produce somatic embryos at similar frequencies, 
demonstrating that sufficient expression of either allele could rescue the 
embryogenic culture phenotype. Transgenic B73 plants were regenerated from the 
somatic embryos without chemical selection and no pleiotropic effects were 
observed in the Wox2a overexpression lines in the regenerated T0 plants or in 
the two independent events which produced T1 progeny. In addition to linking 
natural variation in tissue culture response to Wox2a, our data support the 
utility of Wox2a in enabling transformation of recalcitrant genotypes.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for 
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.14098
PMCID: PMC10440991
PMID: 37357571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]