1. Immun Inflamm Dis. 2023 Jun;11(6):e898. doi: 10.1002/iid3.898.

IL-38 attenuates myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury by inhibiting macrophage 
inflammation.

Wei Y(1), Xing J(1), Su X(1), Li X(1), Yan X(1), Zhao J(1), Tao H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Reperfusion therapy is the most effective approach to resolve 
coronary occlusion, but myocardial injury caused by excessive inflammation 
during myocardial ischemia-reperfusion will also pose a new threat to health. 
Our prior study revealed the expression pattern of interleukin-38 (IL-38) in the 
peripheral blood serum of patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy and the role of 
IL-38 in acute myocardial infarction in mice. However, its role and potential 
mechanisms in myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury (MIRI) remain to be 
determined.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The left anterior descending artery of C57BL/6 mice was 
transiently ligated to induce the MIRI model. We found that MIRI induced the 
expression of endogenous IL-38, which was mainly produced by locally 
infiltrating macrophages. Overexpression of IL-38 in C57BL/6 mice attenuated 
inflammatory injury and decreased myocardial apoptosis after myocardial 
ischemia-reperfusion. Furthermore, IL-38 inhibited lipopolysaccharide-induced 
macrophage inflammation in vitro. Cardiomyocytes cocultured with the supernatant 
of IL-38- and troponin I-treated macrophages showed a lower rate of apoptosis 
than controls.
CONCLUSIONS: IL-38 attenuates MIRI by inhibiting macrophage inflammation. This 
inhibitory effect may be partially achieved by inhibiting the activation of 
NOD-like receptor pyrin domain-related protein 3 inflammasome, resulting in 
decreased expression of inflammatory factors and reduced cardiomyocyte 
apoptosis.

© 2023 The Authors. Immunity, Inflammation and Disease published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/iid3.898
PMCID: PMC10266135
PMID: 37382260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.