1. Nat Commun. 2023 Jul 1;14(1):3896. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-39678-w.

Architecture of a complete Bce-type antimicrobial peptide resistance module.

George NL(1)(2), Orlando BJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI, USA.
(2)Dept. of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI, USA.
(3)Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI, USA. orlandob@msu.edu.

Gram-positive bacteria synthesize and secrete antimicrobial peptides that target 
the essential process of peptidoglycan synthesis. These antimicrobial peptides 
not only regulate the dynamics of microbial communities but are also of clinical 
importance as exemplified by peptides such as bacitracin, vancomycin, and 
daptomycin. Many gram-positive species have evolved specialized antimicrobial 
peptide sensing and resistance machinery known as Bce modules. These modules are 
membrane protein complexes formed by an unusual Bce-type ABC transporter 
interacting with a two-component system sensor histidine kinase. In this work, 
we provide the first structural insight into how the membrane protein components 
of these modules assemble into a functional complex. A cryo-EM structure of an 
entire Bce module revealed an unexpected mechanism of complex assembly, and 
extensive structural flexibility in the sensor histidine kinase. Structures of 
the complex in the presence of a non-hydrolysable ATP analog reveal how 
nucleotide binding primes the complex for subsequent activation. Accompanying 
biochemical data demonstrate how the individual membrane protein components of 
the complex exert functional control over one another to create a tightly 
regulated enzymatic system.

Â© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-39678-w
PMCID: PMC10314905
PMID: 37393310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.