1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 May 30:2023.05.28.542666. doi: 
10.1101/2023.05.28.542666.

Detection of interactions between genetic marker sets and environment in a 
genome-wide study of hypertension.

Shen L(1), Amei A(1), Liu B(1), Liu Y(2), Xu G(1)(2), Oh EC(3)(4), Wang Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nevada School of Medicine, Las 
Vegas.
(4)Nevada Institute of Personalized Medicine, University of Nevada, Las Vegas.

Update in
    G3 (Bethesda). 2025 Jan 8;15(1):jkae263. doi: 10.1093/g3journal/jkae263.

As human complex diseases are influenced by the interplay of genes and 
environment, detecting gene-environment interactions (G × E) can shed light on 
biological mechanisms of diseases and play an important role in disease risk 
prediction. Development of powerful quantitative tools to incorporate G × E in 
complex diseases has potential to facilitate the accurate curation and analysis 
of large genetic epidemiological studies. However, most of existing methods that 
interrogate G × E focus on the interaction effects of an environmental factor 
and genetic variants, exclusively for common or rare variants. In this study, we 
proposed two tests, MAGEIT_RAN and MAGEIT_FIX, to detect interaction effects of 
an environmental factor and a set of genetic markers containing both rare and 
common variants, based on the MinQue for Summary statistics. The genetic main 
effects in MAGEIT_RAN and MAGEIT_FIX are modeled as random or fixed, 
respectively. Through simulation studies, we illustrated that both tests had 
type I error under control and MAGEIT_RAN was overall the most powerful test. We 
applied MAGEIT to a genome-wide analysis of gene-alcohol interactions on 
hypertension in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. We detected two 
genes, CCNDBP1 and EPB42, that interact with alcohol usage to influence blood 
pressure. Pathway analysis identified sixteen significant pathways related to 
signal transduction and development that were associated with hypertension, and 
several of them were reported to have an interactive effect with alcohol intake. 
Our results demonstrated that MAGEIT can detect biologically relevant genes that 
interact with environmental factors to influence complex traits.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.05.28.542666
PMCID: PMC10312472
PMID: 37398075