1. J Psychiatr Brain Sci. 2023;8(2):e230005. doi: 10.20900/jpbs.20230005. Epub
2023  May 26.

A Review of Potential Neuroimaging Biomarkers of Schizophrenia-Risk.

Mamah D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University Medical School, St. Louis, 
MO, 63110, USA.

The risk for developing schizophrenia is increased among first-degree relatives 
of those with psychotic disorders, but the risk is even higher in those meeting 
established criteria for clinical high risk (CHR), a clinical construct most 
often comprising of attenuated psychotic experiences. Conversion to psychosis 
among CHR youth has been reported to be about 15-35% over three years. 
Accurately identifying individuals whose psychotic symptoms will worsen would 
facilitate earlier intervention, but this has been difficult to do using 
behavior measures alone. Brain-based risk markers have the potential to improve 
the accuracy of predicting outcomes in CHR youth. This narrative review provides 
an overview of neuroimaging studies used to investigate psychosis risk, 
including studies involving structural, functional, and diffusion imaging, 
functional connectivity, positron emission tomography, arterial spin labeling, 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and multi-modality approaches. We present 
findings separately in those observed in the CHR state and those associated with 
psychosis progression or resilience. Finally, we discuss future research 
directions that could improve clinical care for those at high risk for 
developing psychotic disorders.

DOI: 10.20900/jpbs.20230005
PMCID: PMC10327607
PMID: 37427077

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The author declares that 
he has no conflicts of interest.