1. Sensors (Basel). 2023 May 11;23(10):4678. doi: 10.3390/s23104678.

Comparison of Common Algorithms for Single-Pixel Imaging via Compressed Sensing.

Zhao W(1), Gao L(1), Zhai A(1), Wang D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Physics and Optoelectronics, Taiyuan University of Technology, No. 
79 West Main Street, Taiyuan 030024, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Advanced Transducers and Intelligent Control System, 
Ministry of Education, and Shanxi Province, Taiyuan University of Technology, 
No. 79 West Main Street, Taiyuan 030024, China.

Single-pixel imaging (SPI) uses a single-pixel detector instead of a detector 
array with a lot of pixels in traditional imaging techniques to realize 
two-dimensional or even multi-dimensional imaging. For SPI using compressed 
sensing, the target to be imaged is illuminated by a series of patterns with 
spatial resolution, and then the reflected or transmitted intensity is 
compressively sampled by the single-pixel detector to reconstruct the target 
image while breaking the limitation of the Nyquist sampling theorem. Recently, 
in the area of signal processing using compressed sensing, many measurement 
matrices as well as reconstruction algorithms have been proposed. It is 
necessary to explore the application of these methods in SPI. Therefore, this 
paper reviews the concept of compressive sensing SPI and summarizes the main 
measurement matrices and reconstruction algorithms in compressive sensing. 
Further, the performance of their applications in SPI through simulations and 
experiments is explored in detail, and then their advantages and disadvantages 
are summarized. Finally, the prospect of compressive sensing with SPI is 
discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/s23104678
PMCID: PMC10223092
PMID: 37430593

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.