1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Jun 27;14:1207574. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1207574. eCollection 2023.

Electroacupuncture treatment ameliorates metabolic disorders in obese ZDF rats 
by regulating liver energy metabolism and gut microbiota.

Ding L(1), Teng R(1), Zhu Y(1), Liu F(1), Wu L(2), Qin L(3), Wu X(4), Liu T(2).

Author information:
(1)Dongfang Hospital, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Health Cultivation of the Ministry of Education, School of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, 
China.
(3)Department of Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Education, Dongfang Hospital, Beijing University of Chinese 
Medicine, Beijing, China.

Metabolic disorders represent a major therapeutic challenge to public health 
worldwide due to their dramatically increasing prevalence. Acupuncture is widely 
used as adjuvant therapy for multiple metabolic diseases. However, detailed 
biological interpretation of the acupuncture stimulations is still limited. The 
gut and the liver are intrinsically connected and related to metabolic function. 
Microbial metabolites might affect the gut-liver axis through multiple 
mechanisms. Liver metabolomics and 16S rRNA sequencing were used to explore the 
specific mechanism of electroacupuncture in treating ZDF rats in this study. 
Electroacupuncture effectively improved glycolipid metabolism disorders of the 
ZDF rats. Histopathology confirmed that electroacupuncture improved diffuse 
hepatic steatosis and hepatocyte vacuolation, and promoted glycogen accumulation 
in the liver. The treatment significantly improved microbial diversity and 
richness and upregulated beneficial bacteria that maintain intestinal epithelial 
homeostasis and decreased bacteria with detrimental metabolic features on host 
metabolism. Liver metabolomics showed that the main effects of 
electroacupuncture include reducing the carbon flow and intermediate products in 
the TCA cycle, regulating the metabolism of various amino acids, and inhibiting 
hepatic glucose output and de novo lipogenesis. The gut-liver axis correlation 
analysis showed a strong correlation between the liver metabolites and the gut 
microbiota, especially allantoin and Adlercreutzia. Electroacupuncture treatment 
can improve abnormal energy metabolism by reducing oxidative stress, ectopic fat 
deposition, and altering metabolic fluxes. Our results will help us to further 
understand the specific mechanism of electroacupuncture in the treatment of 
metabolic diseases.

Copyright Â© 2023 Ding, Teng, Zhu, Liu, Wu, Qin, Wu and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1207574
PMCID: PMC10335763
PMID: 37441502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.