1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2023 Jul 3;64(10):12. doi: 10.1167/iovs.64.10.12.

Human Lacrimal Gland Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells - Isolation, Propagation, 
and Characterization.

Jaffet J(1)(2), Mohanty A(1)(3), Veernala I(3), Singh S(1), Ali MJ(4), Basu 
S(1), Vemuganti GK(3), Singh V(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ocular Regeneration, Professor Brien Holden Eye Research Centre, 
Champalimaud Translational Centre for Eye Research, L. V. Prasad Eye Institute, 
Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(2)Manipal Academy of Higher Education (MAHE), Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(3)School of Medical Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India.
(4)Govindram Seksaria Institute of Dacryology, L. V. Prasad Eye Institute, 
Hyderabad, Telangana, India.

PURPOSE: The existing treatment options for dry eye disease (DED) due to 
lacrimal gland (LG) dysfunction are mainly palliative. Mesenchymal stem cells 
(MSCs) based therapies and 3D-LG organoids have been explored as a curative 
option for LG regeneration in animal models. Human LG epithelial cultures are 
previously established and, here, we aim to isolate and characterize the 
spindle-shaped cells obtained from primary human LG cultures in order to unveil 
its MSC property.
METHODS: Normal human lacrimal glands were obtained from individuals undergoing 
LG debulking surgery. The conditions for human LG-MSC culture were standardized 
to obtain pure population of LG-MSCs at passage 3. Population doubling time 
(PDT), expression of phenotypic markers, tri-lineage differentiation, colony 
forming potential, and gene expression analysis were carried out to assess the 
phenotypic and genotypic characteristics compared to bone marrow-MSCs (BM-MSCs).
RESULTS: Our data show that these spindle-shaped cells exhibit similar 
phenotypic expression, colony-forming ability, and trilineage differentiation 
like BM-MSCs. Moreover, the gene expression also did not show any significant 
difference, except for increased IL1-Î² in LG-MSCs. The LG-MSCs do not express 
any lacrimal epithelial markers unlike LG tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals the first-time evidence for the presence of MSC 
population within the human LGs, and these cells might play a role in 
maintaining healthy microenvironment within normal LG and repair in diseased 
LGs.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.64.10.12
PMCID: PMC10353750
PMID: 37440263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: J. Jaffet, None; A. Mohanty, None; 
I. Veernala, None; S. Singh, None; M.J. Ali, None; S. Basu, None; G.K. 
Vemuganti, None; V. Singh, None