1. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2023 Aug;30(8):103714. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2023.103714. Epub
 2023 Jun 26.

Proinflammatory cytokine profiles in prediabetic Saudi patients.

AlAfaleq NO(1), Hussein TM(1), Al-Shouli ST(2), Altwaijry N(1), Shahnawaz Khan 
M(1), Albutti A(3), Hamed ME(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(2)Immunology Unit, Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, King Saud 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Medical Biotechnology, College of Applied Medical Sciences, 
Qassim University, Buraydah, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Research Center, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Prediabetes is an increase-risk state for diabetes that is associated with an 
increase in blood glucose levels to more than normal, but not increased enough 
to be termed as type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). A timely intervention and 
management of prediabetes can stop its further progression to the diabetic 
state. Many cytokines are involved in diseases including diabetes, however, 
their role in prediabetes is unknown. In this study, we attempted to analyze 
numerous proinflammatory cytokines in prediabetic patients. A total of 60 adult 
Saudi prediabetes patients and healthy control individuals were included in this 
study. To better understand the role of the proinflammatory cytokines in 
prediabetes patients and its potential link to the disease outcome, the 
variations in the levels of these cytokines were investigated using 
Multi-Analyte ELISA technique. The T helper cells (Th1 and Th2) immune response 
expression profiling of 84 genes was done using Real Time-quantitative PCR 
(RT-qPCR) technique. The present finding showed that serum Interleukin IL-2, 
IL-1β, and IL-1α levels of all prediabetes patients were increased when compared 
with healthy control cases (P < 0.05). Inductions of proinflammatory cytokines 
and upregulation of Th1 and Th2 immune genes might play a potential role during 
prediabetes status and may be linked to the disease outcome. Further studies are 
needed to investigate the underlying mechanism of these proinflammatory 
cytokines in diabetes development. A strong positive correlation was found 
between IL and 1α with glucose levels than with IL-1β and IL-2. In conclusion, 
cytokines, especially IL-1, may play a critical role in the development of 
diabetes.

© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2023.103714
PMCID: PMC10344800
PMID: 37457235

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.