1. J Org Chem. 2023 Aug 4;88(15):11045-11055. doi: 10.1021/acs.joc.3c01005. Epub 
2023 Jul 19.

Chemoenzymatic Synthesis of Tenofovir.

Zdun B(1), Reiter T(2), Kroutil W(2), Borowiecki P(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Biotransformation, Department of Drugs 
Technology and Biotechnology, Faculty of Chemistry, Warsaw University of 
Technology, Koszykowa 75, 00-662 Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Institute of Chemistry, University of Graz, NAWI Graz, BioTechMed Graz, Field 
of Excellence BioHealth, Heinrichstrasse 28, 8010 Graz, Austria.

We report on novel chemoenzymatic routes toward tenofovir using low-cost 
starting materials and commercial or homemade enzyme preparations as 
biocatalysts. The biocatalytic key step was accomplished either via 
stereoselective reduction using an alcohol dehydrogenase or via kinetic 
resolution using a lipase. By employing a suspension of immobilized lipase from 
Burkholderia cepacia (Amano PS-IM) in a mixture of vinyl acetate and toluene, 
the desired (R)-ester (99% ee) was obtained on a 500 mg scale (60 mM) in 47% 
yield. Alternatively, stereoselective reduction of 1-(6-chloro-9H-purin-9-yl) 
propan-2-one (84 mg, 100 mM) catalyzed by lyophilized E. coli cells harboring 
recombinant alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) from Lactobacillus kefir (E. coli/Lk-ADH 
Prince) allowed one to reach quantitative conversion, 86% yield and excellent 
optical purity (>99% ee) of the corresponding (R)-alcohol. The key 
(R)-intermediate was transformed into tenofovir through "one-pot" 
aminolysis-hydrolysis of (R)-acetate in NH3-saturated methanol, alkylation of 
the resulting (R)-alcohol with tosylated diethyl(hydroxymethyl) phosphonate, and 
bromotrimethylsilane (TMSBr)-mediated cleavage of the formed phosphonate ester 
into the free phosphonic acid. The elaborated enzymatic strategy could be 
applicable in the asymmetric synthesis of tenofovir prodrug derivatives, 
including 5'-disoproxil fumarate (TDF, Viread) and 5'-alafenamide (TAF, 
Vemlidy). The molecular basis of the stereoselectivity of the employed ADHs was 
revealed by molecular docking studies.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.joc.3c01005
PMCID: PMC10407936
PMID: 37467462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.