1. Clin Transl Med. 2023 Jul;13(7):e1333. doi: 10.1002/ctm2.1333.

Glutaredoxin-1 promotes lymphangioleiomyomatosis progression through inhibiting 
Bim-mediated apoptosis via COX2/PGE2/ERK pathway.

Feng Y(1), Li T(1), Li Y(1), Lin Z(1), Han X(1), Pei X(1), Zhang Y(1), Li F(1), 
Yang J(1), Shao D(2), Li C(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology and College of Pharmacy, 
Nankai University, Tianjin, P. R. China.
(2)Chongqing University Central Hospital, Chongqing Emergency Medical Center, 
Chongqing, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a female-predominant interstitial 
lung disease, characterized by progressive cyst formation and respiratory 
failure. Clinical treatment with the mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin could relieve 
partially the respiratory symptoms, but not curative. It is urgent to illustrate 
the fundamental mechanisms of TSC2 deficiency to the development of LAM, 
especially mTORC1-independent mechanisms. Glutaredoxin-1 (Glrx), an essential 
glutathione (GSH)-dependent thiol-oxidoreductase, maintains redox homeostasis 
and participates in various processes via controlling protein GSH adducts. Redox 
signalling through protein GSH adducts in LAM remains largely elusive. Here, we 
demonstrate the underlying mechanism of Glrx in the pathogenesis of LAM.
METHODS: 1. Abnormal Glrx expression in various kinds of human malignancies was 
identified by the GEPIA tumour database, and the expression of Glrx in 
LAM-derived cells was detected by real-time quantitative reverse transcription 
(RT-qPCR) and immunoblot. 2. Stable Glrx knockdown cell line was established to 
evaluate cellular impact. 3. Cell viability was determined by CCK8 assay. 4. 
Apoptotic cell number and intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) level were 
quantified by flow cytometry. 5. Cox2 expression and PGE2 production were 
detected to clarify the mechanism of Bim expression modulated by Glrx. 6. 
S-glutathionylated p65 was enriched and detected by immunoprecipitation and the 
direct regulation of Glrx on p65 was determined. 7. The xenograft animal model 
was established and photon flux was analyzed using IVIS Spectrum.
RESULTS: In LAM, TSC2 negatively regulated abnormal Glrx expression and 
activation in a mTORC1-independent manner. Knockdown of Glrx increased the 
expression of Bim and the accumulation of ROS, together with elevated 
S-glutathionylated proteins, contributing to the induction of apoptotic cell 
death and inhibited cell proliferation. Knockdown of Glrx in TSC2-deficient LAM 
cells increased GSH adducts on nuclear factor-kappa B p65, which contributed to 
a decrease in the expression of Cox2 and the biosynthesis of PGE2. Inhibition of 
PGE2 metabolism attenuated phosphorylation of ERK, which led to the accumulation 
of Bim, due to the imbalance of its phosphorylation and proteasome degradation. 
In xenograft tumour models, knockdown of Glrx in TSC2-deficient LAM cells 
inhibited tumour growth and increased tumour cell apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, we provide a novel redox-dependent mechanism in the 
pathogenesis of LAM and propose that Glrx may be a beneficial strategy for the 
treatment of LAM or other TSC-related diseases.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Clinical and Translational Medicine published by John Wiley 
& Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Shanghai Institute of Clinical 
Bioinformatics.

DOI: 10.1002/ctm2.1333
PMCID: PMC10361546
PMID: 37478294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.