1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2023 Jul 4;16:1193636. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2023.1193636. 
eCollection 2023.

RNA-binding proteins as a common ground for neurodegeneration and inflammation 
in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and multiple sclerosis.

Acosta-Galeana I(1), Hernández-Martínez R(2), Reyes-Cruz T(3), Chiquete E(4), 
Aceves-Buendia JJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Química, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, 
Mexico.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Veracruzana, Xalapa, Mexico.
(3)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular, División de Ciencias Biológicas y de la 
Salud, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana, Mexico City, Mexico.
(4)Departamento de Neurología y Psiquiatría, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias 
Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, Mexico.

The neurodegenerative and inflammatory illnesses of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis and multiple sclerosis were once thought to be completely distinct 
entities that did not share any remarkable features, but new research is 
beginning to reveal more information about their similarities and differences. 
Here, we review some of the pathophysiological features of both diseases and 
their experimental models: RNA-binding proteins, energy balance, protein 
transportation, and protein degradation at the molecular level. We make a 
thorough analysis on TDP-43 and hnRNP A1 dysfunction, as a possible common 
ground in both pathologies, establishing a potential link between 
neurodegeneration and pathological immunity. Furthermore, we highlight the 
putative variations that diverge from a common ground in an atemporal course 
that proposes three phases for all relevant molecular events.

Copyright © 2023 Acosta-Galeana, Hernández-Martínez, Reyes-Cruz, Chiquete and 
Aceves-Buendia.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2023.1193636
PMCID: PMC10355071
PMID: 37475885

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.