1. Neurology. 2023 Oct 10;101(15):e1572-e1576. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000207647.
 Epub 2023 Jul 24.

Child Neurology: Mucopolysaccharidosis IIID: Evidence From Ultrastructural and 
Genomic Study.

Santhoshkumar R(1), Mahale RR(1), Kishore PK(1), Chickabasaviah YT(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Neuropathology (R.S., Y.T.C.) and Neurology (R.R.M., 
P.K.K.), National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bengaluru, 
India.
(2)From the Departments of Neuropathology (R.S., Y.T.C.) and Neurology (R.R.M., 
P.K.K.), National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bengaluru, 
India. yasha_muthane@yahoo.co.in.

Mucopolysaccharidosis IIID (MPS IIID/Sanfilippo syndrome D, OMIM # 252940) is an 
autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) and the rarest form of the 
mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) III subtypes. It is caused by sequence variations in 
the gene encoding lysosomal enzyme N-acetyl glucosamine-6-sulphatase (GNS). 
Deficiency of GNS impairs catabolism of glycosaminoglycans causing accumulation 
of heparan sulphate within lysosomes of various tissues, which is visualized as 
membranous cytoplasmic bodies (MCBs) on electron microscopy. The recognition of 
this ultrastructural feature in a muscle biopsy instigated genetic evaluation 
for LSD in our case resulting in the detection of a novel pathogenic GNS gene 
variant. The patient also exhibited intellectual disability since childhood, 
reduced vision due to pigmentary retinopathy, and behavioral abnormalities 
without other systemic features of MPS. In this study, we report a patient of 
Indian origin with MPS IIID based on a novel pathogenic variant c.1078 G>T 
(p.G360C) in the GNS and the presence of MCBs in muscle biopsy, characterized by 
several novel findings including the occurrence of pigmentary retinopathy, which 
extends the clinical spectrum of MPS IIID.

Â© 2023 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000207647
PMCID: PMC10585691
PMID: 37487748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant disclosures. Go 
to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures.