1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Jul 17;14:1197897. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1197897. eCollection 2023.

Normalization of puberty and adult height in girls with Turner syndrome: results 
of the Swedish Growth Hormone trials initiating transition into adulthood.

Kriström B(1), Ankarberg-Lindgren C(2), Barrenäs ML(3), Nilsson KO(4), 
Albertsson-Wikland K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Science, Pediatrics, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Göteborg Pediatric 
Growth Research Center, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Department of Physiology/Endocrinology, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, University Hospital Malmö, Lund University, 
Malmö, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To study the impact of GH dose and age at GH start in girls with 
Turner syndrome (TS), aiming for normal height and age at pubertal onset (PO) 
and at adult height (AH). However, age at diagnosis will limit treatment 
possibilities.
METHODS: National multicenter investigator-initiated studies (TNR 87-052-01 and 
TNR 88-072) in girls with TS, age 3-16 years at GH start during year 1987-1998, 
with AH in 2003-2011. Of the 144 prepubertal girls with TS, 132 girls were 
followed to AH (intention to treat), while 43 girls reduced dose or stopped 
treatment prematurely, making n=89 for Per Protocol population. Age at GH start 
was 3-9 years (young; n=79) or 9-16 years (old; n=53). Treatment given were 
recombinant human (rh)GH (Genotropin® Kabi Peptide Hormones, Sweden) 33 or 67 
µg/kg/day, oral ethinyl-estradiol (2/3) or transdermal 17β-estradiol (1/3), and, 
after age 11 years, mostly oxandrolone. Gain in heightSDS, AHSDS, and age at PO 
and at AH were evaluated.
RESULTS: At GH start, heightSDS was -2.8 (versus non-TS girls) for all subgroups 
and mean age for young was 5.7 years and that of old was 11.6 years. There was a 
clear dose-response in both young and old TS girls; the mean difference was 
(95%CI) 0.66 (-0.91 to -0.26) and 0.57 (-1.0 to -0.13), respectively. The 
prepubertal gainSDS (1.3-2.1) was partly lost during puberty (-0.4 to -2.1). 
Age/heightSDS at PO ranged from 13 years/-0.42 for GH67young to 15.2 years/-1.47 
for GH33old. At AH, GH67old group became tallest (17.2 years; 159.9 cm; -1.27 
SDS; total gainSDS, 1.55) compared to GH67young group being least delayed (16.1 
years; 157.1 cm; -1.73 SDS; total, 1.08). The shortest was the GH33young group 
(17.3 years; 153.7 cm: -2.28 SDS; total gainSDS, 0.53), and the most delayed was 
the GH33old group, (18.5 years; 156.5 cm; -1.82 SDS; total gainSDS, 0.98).
CONCLUSION: For both young and old TS girls, there was a GH-dose growth 
response, and for the young, there was less delayed age at PO and at AH. All 
four groups reached an AH within normal range, despite partly losing the 
prepubertal gain during puberty. Depending on age at diagnosis, low age at start 
with higher GH dose resulted in greater prepubertal height gain, permitting 
estrogen to start earlier at normal age and attaining normal AH at normal age, 
favoring physiological treatment and possibly also bone health, hearing, uterine 
growth and fertility, psychosocial wellbeing during adolescence, and the 
transition to adulthood.

Copyright © 2023 Kriström, Ankarberg-Lindgren, Barrenäs, Nilsson and 
Albertsson-Wikland.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1197897
PMCID: PMC10389045
PMID: 37529614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.