1. Clin Kidney J. 2022 Sep 12;16(8):1258-1264. doi: 10.1093/ckj/sfac207. 
eCollection 2023 Aug.

Focal segmental glomerular sclerosis can be effectively treated using an 
intensive B-cell depletion therapy.

Roccatello D(1), Baffa A(1), Naretto C(1), Barreca A(2), Cravero R(3), Roscini 
E(4), Sciascia S(1), Fenoglio R(1).

Author information:
(1)University Center of Excellence on Nephrologic, Rheumatologic and Rare 
Diseases (ERK-Net, ERN-Reconnet and RITA-ERN Member) with Nephrology and 
Dialysis Unit and Center of Immuno-Rheumatology and Rare Diseases (CMID), 
Coordinating Center of the Interregional Network for Rare Diseases of Piedmont 
and Aosta Valley, San Giovanni Bosco Hub Hospital, 10154 Turin, Italy.
(2)Division of Pathology, Città della Salute e della Scienza Hospital and 
University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(3)Unit of Nephrology and Dialysis, Ospedale degli Infermi, Biella, Italy.
(4)Unit of Nephrology and Dialysis, Casale Monferrato and Novi Ligure Hospitals, 
Alessandria, Italy.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/ckj/sfad122.

BACKGROUND: Focal segmental glomerular sclerosis (FSGS) is a histologic lesion 
rather than a specific disease entity and represents a cluster of different 
conditions affecting both children and adults that includes primary, secondary 
and genetically mediated forms. These forms can be distinguished by electron 
microscopy and genetic assessment and show different responsiveness to steroids 
and immunosuppressants. Despite some promising effects of rituximab in nephrotic 
syndrome in children, the results in adults with FSGS are disappointing. Our 
group previously explored the effectiveness of rituximab in eight adult patients 
with unselected forms of FSGS and achieved a consistent reduction in proteinuria 
in one case. Following this experience, we developed an alternative therapeutic 
option intended to enhance the potential of rituximab with the support of other 
synergic drugs. We herein report the results of this therapeutic protocol (six 
administrations of rituximab plus two of intravenous cyclophosphamide plus 
glucocorticoids) in seven prospectively enrolled patients with extensive 
podocyte effacement and recurrent relapses or steroid dependence.
RESULTS: Patients had a median baseline serum creatinine level of 2.2 mg/dl 
(range 1-4.7) that decreased to 1.1 mg/dl (range 0.9-2.2) and 1.1 mg/dl (range 
0.75-2.21) after 3 and 6 months, respectively, and remained unchanged at 
12 months. Three of five patients with renal failure turned to normal function 
while the other two patients maintained a stable impairment after 18 and 
52 months. The median proteinuria decreased from 6.1 g/24 h to 3.5, 3.5 and 
1.9 g/24 h at 3, 6 and 12 months, respectively. Specifically, five of seven 
patients had a partial response at 12 months and became non-nephrotic. One of 
them had a complete response at 18 months and was still in complete remission at 
the last follow-up visit at 36 months. Proteinuria persisted unchanged in two of 
seven patients with a genetic-related disease. No serious late adverse events 
were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that intensive B-cell depletion therapy is able to 
reverse the nephrotic syndrome of steroid-dependent or frequently relapsing 
adult patients with putatively idiopathic FSGS (i.e. with extensive podocyte 
effacement).

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the ERA.

DOI: 10.1093/ckj/sfac207
PMCID: PMC10387391
PMID: 37529640

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.