1. Eur J Med Chem. 2023 Nov 5;259:115698. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2023.115698. Epub
 2023 Aug 1.

Recent advances in the development of inhibitors targeting KRAS-G12C and its 
related pathways.

Zhao D(1), Liu Y(1), Yi F(1), Zhao X(2), Lu K(3).

Author information:
(1)China International Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Food 
Nutrition/Safety and Medicinal Chemistry, College of Biotechnology, Tianjin 
University of Science & Technology, Tianjin, 300457, China.
(2)College of Chemistry, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Structure and Performance for 
Functional Molecules, Tianjin Normal University, Tianjin, 300387, China.
(3)China International Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Food 
Nutrition/Safety and Medicinal Chemistry, College of Biotechnology, Tianjin 
University of Science & Technology, Tianjin, 300457, China. Electronic address: 
lukui@tust.edu.cn.

The RAS gene, also known as the mouse sarcoma virus, includes three genes (KRAS, 
HRAS, and NRAS) that are associated with human tumors. Among them, KRAS has the 
highest incidence of mutations in cancer, accounting for around 80% of cases. At 
the molecular level, the RAS gene plays a regulatory role in transcription and 
translation, while at the cellular level, it affects cell proliferation and 
migration, making it crucial for cancer development. In 2021, the FDA approved 
AMG510, the first direct inhibitor targeting the KRAS-G12C mutation, which has 
shown tumor regression, prolonged survival, and low off-target activity. 
However, with the increase of drug resistance, a single inhibitor is no longer 
sufficient to achieve the desired effect on tumors. Therefore, a large number of 
other highly efficient inhibitors are being developed at different stages. This 
article provides an overview of the mechanism of action targeting KRAS-G12C in 
the KRASGTP-KRASGDP cycle pathway, as well as the structure-activity 
relationship, structure optimization, and biological activity effects of 
inhibitors that target the upstream and downstream pathways, or combination 
therapy.

Copyright Â© 2023 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2023.115698
PMID: 37542991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest We declare 
that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or 
organizations that can inappropriately influence our work. There is no 
professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, 
service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position 
presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled.