1. PLoS Biol. 2023 Aug 8;21(8):e3002214. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3002214. 
eCollection 2023 Aug.

Evolutionary safety of lethal mutagenesis driven by antiviral treatment.

Lobinska G(1), Pilpel Y(1), Nowak MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Nucleoside analogs are a major class of antiviral drugs. Some act by increasing 
the viral mutation rate causing lethal mutagenesis of the virus. Their mutagenic 
capacity, however, may lead to an evolutionary safety concern. We define 
evolutionary safety as a probabilistic assurance that the treatment will not 
generate an increased number of mutants. We develop a mathematical framework to 
estimate the total mutant load produced with and without mutagenic treatment. We 
predict rates of appearance of such virus mutants as a function of the timing of 
treatment and the immune competence of patients, employing realistic assumptions 
about the vulnerability of the viral genome and its potential to generate viable 
mutants. We focus on the case study of Molnupiravir, which is an FDA-approved 
treatment against Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19). We estimate that 
Molnupiravir is narrowly evolutionarily safe, subject to the current estimate of 
parameters. Evolutionary safety can be improved by restricting treatment with 
this drug to individuals with a low immunological clearance rate and, in future, 
by designing treatments that lead to a greater increase in mutation rate. We 
report a simple mathematical rule to determine the fold increase in mutation 
rate required to obtain evolutionary safety that is also applicable to other 
pathogen-treatment combinations.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Lobinska et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3002214
PMCID: PMC10409280
PMID: 37552682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.