1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2023 Oct;10(29):e2303195. doi: 10.1002/advs.202303195. Epub 
2023 Aug 23.

A Competitive High-Throughput Screening Platform for Designing Polylactic 
Acid-Specific Binding Peptides.

Lu Y(1), Hintzen KW(1)(2), Kurkina T(1), Ji Y(1), Schwaneberg U(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen University, 52074, Aachen, Germany.
(2)DWI-Leibniz Institute for Interactive Materials, 52074, Aachen, Germany.

Among biobased polymers, polylactic acid (PLA) is recognized as one of the most 
promising bioplastics to replace petrochemical-based polymers. PLA is typically 
blended with other polymers such as polypropylene (PP) for improved melt 
processability, thermal stability, and stiffness. A technical challenge in 
recycling of PLA/PP blends is the sorting/separation of PLA from PP. Material 
binding peptides (MBPs) can bind to various materials. Engineered MBPs that can 
bind in a material-specific manner have a high potential for material-specific 
detection or enhanced degradation of PLA in mixed PLA/PP plastics. To obtain a 
material-specific MBP for PLA binding (termed PLAbodies ), protein engineering 
of MBP Cg-Def for improved PLA binding specificity is reported in this work. In 
detail, a 96-well microtiter plate based high-throughput screening system for 
PLA specific binding (PLABS) was developed and validated in a protein 
engineering (KnowVolution) campaign. Finally, the Cg-Def variant V2 (Cg-Def 
S19K/K10L/N13H) with a 2.3-fold improved PLA binding specificity compared to PP 
was obtained. Contact angle and surface plasmon resonance measurements confirmed 
improved material-specific binding of V2 to PLA (1.30-fold improved PLA surface 
coverage). The established PLABS screening platform represents a general 
methodology for designing PLAbodies for applications in detection, sorting, and 
material-specific degradation of PLA in mixed plastics.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202303195
PMCID: PMC10582454
PMID: 37612817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.