1. PLoS One. 2023 Aug 25;18(8):e0290688. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0290688. 
eCollection 2023.

USP4 promotes the proliferation and glucose metabolism of gastric cancer cells 
by upregulating PKM2.

Chen Y(1), Guo Y(1), Yuan M(2), Guo S(1), Cui S(1), Chen D(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences and Medicine, Shandong University of Technology, 
Zibo, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Jiangsu Normal University, Xuzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: The pyruvate kinase enzyme PKM2 catalyzes the final step in 
glycolysis and converts phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to pyruvate. PKM2 is often 
overexpressed in cancer and plays a role in the Warburg effect. The expression 
of PKM2 can be regulated at different levels. While it has been proven that PKM2 
can be regulated by ubiquitination, little is known about its de-ubiquitination 
regulation.
METHODS: Immunoprecipitation was applied to identify the PKM2 interaction 
protein and to determine the interaction region between PKM2 and USP4. 
Immunofluorescence was performed to determine the cellular localization of USP4 
and PKM2. The regulation of PKM2 by USP4 was examined by western blot and 
ubiquitination assay. MTT assays, glucose uptake, and lactate production were 
performed to analyze the biological effects of USP4 in gastric cancer cells.
RESULTS: USP4 interacts with PKM2 and catalyzes the de-ubiquitination of PKM2. 
Overexpression of USP4 promotes cell proliferation, glucose uptake, and lactate 
production in gastric cancer cells. Knockdown of USP4 reduces PKM2 levels and 
results in a reduction in cell proliferation and the glycolysis rate.
CONCLUSIONS: USP4 plays a tumor-promoting role in gastric cancer cells by 
regulating PKM2.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Chen et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0290688
PMCID: PMC10456134
PMID: 37624791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.