1. Front Plant Sci. 2023 Aug 9;14:1098987. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2023.1098987. 
eCollection 2023.

De novo transcriptome analysis of Dysoxylum binectariferum to unravel the 
biosynthesis of pharmaceutically relevant specialized metabolites.

Kumara PM(1)(2), Varun E(2), Sanjay JR(2), Madhushree AH(2), Thimmappa R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Crop Improvement, Kittur Rani Chennamma 
College of Horticulture, Arabhavi, University of Horticultural Sciences, 
Bagalkot, Karnataka, India.
(2)Center for Ayurveda Biology and Holistic Nutrition, The University of 
Trans-Disciplinary Health Sciences and Technology (TDU), Bengaluru, Karnataka, 
India.
(3)Amity Institute of Genome Engineering, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida, 
India.

The tropical tree, D. binectariferum, is a prominent source of chromone alkaloid 
rohitukine, which is used in the semi-syntheses of anticancer molecules such as 
flavopiridol and P-276-00. The biosynthetic pathway of rohitukine or its 
derivatives is currently unknown in plants. Here, we explored chromone alkaloid 
biosynthesis in D. binectariferum through targeted transcriptome sequencing. 
Illumina sequencing of leaves and roots of a year-old D. binectariferum seedling 
generated, 42.43 and 38.74 million paired-end short reads, respectively. Quality 
filtering and de novo assembly of the transcriptome generated 274,970 contigs 
and 126,788 unigenes with an N50 contig length of 1560 bp. The assembly 
generated 117,619 translated unigene protein sequences and 51,598 non-redundant 
sequences. Nearly 80% of these non-redundant sequences were annotated to 
publicly available protein and nucleotide databases, suggesting the completeness 
and effectiveness of the transcriptome assembly. Using the assembly, we 
identified a chalcone synthase (CHS) and three type III polyketide synthases 
(PKS-III; non-CHS type) that are likely to be involved in the biosynthesis of 
chromone ring/noreugenin moiety of rohitukine. We also identified key enzymes 
like lysine decarboxylase in the piperidine pathway that make the piperidine 
moiety of rohitukine. Besides these, the upstream enzymes in flavonoid 
biosynthesis like phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL), trans-cinnamate 
4-hydroxylase (C4H),4-coumarate-CoA ligase (4CL), and chalcone isomerase (CHI) 
have also been identified. Also, terpene synthases that are likely to be 
involved in the biosynthesis of various terpenoid scaffolds have been 
identified. Together, the D. binectariferum transcriptome resource forms a basis 
for further exploration of biosynthetic pathways of these valuable compounds 
through functional validation of the candidate genes and metabolic engineering 
in heterologous hosts. Additionally, the transcriptome dataset generated will 
serve as an important resource for research on functional genomics and enzyme 
discovery in D. binectariferum and comparative analysis with other Meliaceae 
family members.

Copyright Â© 2023 Kumara, Varun, Sanjay, Madhushree and Thimmappa.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2023.1098987
PMCID: PMC10450223
PMID: 37636089

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.