1. Open Res Eur. 2022 Mar 18;1:116. doi: 10.12688/openreseurope.14073.2. 
eCollection 2021.

Theoretical spectroscopic study of acetyl (CH (3)CO), vinoxy (CH (2)CHO), and 
1-methylvinoxy (CH (3)COCH (2)) radicals. Barrierless formation processes of 
acetone in the gas phase.

El Hadki H(1), Gámez VG(2), Dalbouha S(1)(3), Marakchi K(1), Kabbaj OK(1), 
Komiha N(1), Carvajal M(4)(5), Senent Diez ML(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Spectroscopie, Modélisation Moléculaire, Matériaux, 
Nanomatériaux, Eau et Environnement, LS3MN2E/CERNE2D, Faculté des Sciences 
Rabat, Université Mohammed V, Rabat, BP1014, Morocco.
(2)Departamento de Química y Física Teóricas, IEM-CSIC, Unidad Asociada GIFMAN, 
CSIC-UHU, Madrid, 28006, Spain.
(3)Equipe de recherche : Matériaux et Applications Environnementales, 
Laboratoire de Chimie Appliquée et Environnement, Département de chimie, Faculté 
des Sciences d'Agadir, Université Ibn Zohr, Agadir, B.P 8106, Morocco.
(4)Departamento de Ciencias Integradas, Centro de Estudios Avanzados en Física, 
Matemática y Computación; Unidad Asociada GIFMAN, CSIC-UHU, Universidad de 
Huelva, Huelva, 21071, Spain.
(5)Instituto Universitario Carlos I de Física Teórica y Computacional, 
University of Granada, Granada, Spain.

Background: Acetone is present in the earth´s atmosphere and 
extra-terrestrially. The knowledge of its chemical history in these environments 
represents a challenge with important implications for global tropospheric 
chemistry and astrochemistry. The results of a search for efficient barrierless 
pathways producing acetone from radicals in the gas phase are described in this 
paper. The spectroscopic properties of radicals needed for their experimental 
detection are provided.   Methods: The reactants were acetone fragments of low 
stability and small species containing C, O and H atoms. Two exergonic 
bimolecular addition reactions involving the radicals CH 3, CH 3CO, and CH 3COCH 
2, were found to be competitive according to the kinetic rates calculated at 
different temperatures. An extensive spectroscopic study of the radicals CH 
3COCH 2 and CH 3CO, as well as the CH 2CHO isomer, was performed. Rovibrational 
parameters, anharmonic vibrational transitions, and excitations to the low-lying 
excited states are provided. For this purpose, RCCSD(T)-F12 and MRCI/CASSCF 
calculations were performed. In addition, since all the species presented 
non-rigid properties, a variational procedure of reduced dimensionality was 
employed to explore the far infrared region. Results: The internal rotation 
barriers were determined to be V 3=143.7 cm -1 (CH 3CO), V 2=3838.7 cm -1 (CH 
2CHO) and V 3=161.4 cm -1 and V 2=2727.5 cm -1 (CH 3COCH 2).The splitting of the 
ground vibrational state due to the torsional barrier have been computed to be 
2.997 cm -1, 0.0 cm -1, and 0.320 cm -1, for CH 3CO, CH 2CHO, and CH 3COCH 2, 
respectively. Conclusions: Two addition reactions, H+CH 3COCH 2 and CH 3+CH 3CO, 
could be considered barrierless formation processes of acetone after considering 
all the possible formation routes, starting from 58 selected reactants, which 
are fragments of the molecule. The spectroscopic study of the radicals involved 
in the formation processes present non-rigidity. The interconversion of their 
equilibrium geometries has important spectroscopic effects on CH 3CO and CH 
3COCH 2, but is negligible for CH 2CHO.

Copyright: © 2022 El Hadki H et al.

DOI: 10.12688/openreseurope.14073.2
PMCID: PMC10445905
PMID: 37645120

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.