1. Cell Death Dis. 2023 Sep 2;14(9):584. doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-06095-2.

Ufmylation on UFBP1 alleviates non-alcoholic fatty liver disease by modulating 
hepatic endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Mao Z(#)(1), Ma X(#)(1), Jing Y(#)(1), Shen M(#)(2), Ma X(1), Zhu J(1), Liu 
H(3), Zhang G(4), Chen F(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, 
Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 201999, China.
(2)School of Graduate, Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu, Anhui, 233030, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, 
Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 201999, China. 
lhf_404@163.com.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai JiaoTong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200233, China. zhgy9103@163.com.
(5)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, 
Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 201999, China. 
chenfengling@sjtu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common liver disease 
characterized by lipid accumulation and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, while 
effective therapies targeting the specific characteristics of NAFLD are limited. 
Ufmylation is a newly found post-translational modification process that 
involves the attachment of the Ubiquitin-fold modifier 1 (UFM1) protein to its 
substrates via ufmylation modification system. Ufmylation regulates ER stress 
via modifying UFM1 binding protein 1 (UFBP1), suggesting a potential role for 
ufmylation in NAFLD pathogenesis. However, the precise role of ufmylation in 
NAFLD remains unclear. Herein, we aim to elucidate the impact of ufmylation on 
UFBP1 in NAFLD and explore the underlying mechanisms involved. We observed 
increased expression of UFM1-conjugated proteins and ufmylation modification 
system components in livers with steatosis derived from NAFLD patients and NAFLD 
models. Upregulation of ufmylation on hepatic proteins appeared to be an 
adaptive response to hepatic ER stress in NAFLD. In vitro, knocking down UFBP1 
resulted in increased lipid accumulation and lipogenesis in hepatocytes treated 
with free fatty acids (FFA), which could be rescued by wild-type UFBP1 (WT 
UFBP1) but not by a mutant form of UFBP1 lacking the main ufmylation site lys267 
(UFBP1 K267R). In vivo, ufmylation on UFBP1 ameliorated obesity, hepatic 
steatosis, hepatic lipogenesis, dyslipidemia, insulin resistance and liver 
damage in mice with NAFLD induced by a high fat diet (HFD). We also demonstrated 
that the downregulation of UFBP1 induced ER stress, whereas the reintroduction 
or overexpression of UFBP1 alleviated ER stress in a manner dependent on 
ufmylation in NAFLD. This mechanism could be responsible for the amelioration of 
aberrant hepatic lipogenesis and insulin resistance in NAFLD. Our data reveal a 
protective role of ufmylation on UFBP1 against NAFLD and offer a specific target 
for NAFLD treatment.

Â© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-023-06095-2
PMCID: PMC10475044
PMID: 37660122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.