1. Front Plant Sci. 2023 Aug 25;14:1233248. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2023.1233248. 
eCollection 2023.

Pyramiding of transcription factor, PgHSF4, and stress-responsive genes of p68, 
Pg47, and PsAKR1 impart multiple abiotic stress tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa 
L.).

Sheela HS(1), Vennapusa AR(1)(2), Melmaiee K(2), Prasad TG(1), Reddy CP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Crop Physiology, University of Agricultural Sciences, Gandhi 
Krishi Vigyana Kendra (GKVK), Bengaluru, KA, India.
(2)Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Delaware State University, 
Dover, DE, United States.

Abiotic stresses such as drought, salinity, and heat stress significantly affect 
rice crop growth and production. Under uncertain climatic conditions, the 
concurrent multiple abiotic stresses at different stages of rice production 
became a major challenge for agriculture. Hence, improving rice's multiple 
abiotic stress tolerance is essential to overcome unprecedented challenges under 
adverse environmental conditions. A significant challenge for rice breeding 
programs in improving abiotic stress tolerance involves multiple traits and 
their complexity. Multiple traits must be targeted to improve multiple stress 
tolerance in rice and uncover the mechanisms. With this hypothesis, in the 
present study gene stacking approach is used to integrate multiple traits 
involved in stress tolerance. The multigene transgenics co-expressing Pennisetum 
glaucum 47 (Pg47), Pea 68 (p68), Pennisetum glaucum Heat Shock Factor 4(PgHSF4), 
and Pseudomonas Aldo Keto Reductase 1 (PsAKR1) genes in the rice genotype 
(AC39020) were developed using the in-planta transformation method. The 
promising transgenic lines maintained higher yields under semi-irrigated aerobic 
cultivation (moisture stress). These 15 promising transgenic rice seedlings 
showed improved shoot and root growth traits under salinity, accelerating aging, 
temperature, and oxidative stress. They showed better physiological 
characteristics, such as chlorophyll content, membrane stability, and lower 
accumulation of reactive oxygen species, under multiple abiotic stresses than 
wild-type. Enhanced expression of transgenes and other stress-responsive 
downstream genes such as HSP70, SOD, APX, SOS, PP2C, and P5CS in transgenic 
lines suggest the possible molecular mechanism for imparting the abiotic stress 
tolerance. This study proved that multiple genes stacking as a novel strategy 
induce several mechanisms and responsible traits to overcome multiple abiotic 
stresses. This multigene combination can potentially improve tolerance to 
multiple abiotic stress conditions and pave the way for developing 
climate-resilient crops.

Copyright Â© 2023 Sheela, Vennapusa, Melmaiee, Prasad and Reddy.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2023.1233248
PMCID: PMC10492517
PMID: 37692421

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.