1. Microbiol Spectr. 2023 Sep 19;11(5):e0098523. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.00985-23. 
Online ahead of print.

Regulation of 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol biosynthesis and biocontrol capacity by 
the BolA family protein IbaG in Pseudomonas fluorescens 2P24.

Dong Q(1), Yan Q(2), Zhang B(1), Zhang LQ(3), Wu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Agro-Environment and Agro-Product Safety/College of 
Agriculture, Guangxi University , Nanning, China.
(2)Department of Plant Sciences and Plant Pathology, Montana State University , 
Bozeman, Montana, USA.
(3)College of Plant Protection, China Agricultural University , Beijing, China.

The monothiol glutaredoxin GrxD plays an essential role in the biosynthesis of 
the antibiotic 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (2,4-DAPG) and the biocontrol capacity 
of the soil bacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens 2P24. However, the detailed 
mechanism underlying GrxD-mediated activation of the production of 2,4-DAPG 
remains unclear. Here, we found that GrxD directly interacted with IbaG, a BolA 
protein family member. The mutation of ibaG significantly decreased 2,4-DAPG 
production. Furthermore, expressing ibaG restored the production of 2,4-DAPG in 
the grxD ibaG double mutant to wild-type levels in the presence of 
dithiothreitol, suggesting that IbaG was required for GrxD-mediated regulation 
of 2,4-DAPG production. Transcriptome sequencing analyses revealed that IbaG 
plays a global role in gene regulation by affecting the expression of numerous 
genes throughout the genome. We also demonstrated that IbaG is an important 
regulator of several cellular processes, including swarming motility, biofilm 
formation, siderophore production, and acid resistance. Altogether, our data 
suggest that IbaG has an essential role in 2,4-DAPG production, motility, and 
biofilm formation. We also propose a regulatory mechanism linking GrxD to 
2,4-DAPG production via IbaG. IMPORTANCE The production of 
2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (2,4-DAPG) is positively influenced by the monothiol 
glutaredoxin GrxD in Pseudomonas fluorescens 2P24. However, the regulatory 
mechanism underlying GrxD-mediated regulation of 2,4-DAPG biosynthesis is mostly 
uncharacterized. Here, we show the function of the BolA-like protein IbaG in 
2,4-DAPG biosynthesis. We also demonstrate that GrxD directly interacts with 
IbaG and influences the redox state of IbaG. Altogether, this work provides new 
insights into the role of the highly conserved IbaG protein in regulating 
2,4-DAPG synthesis, biofilm formation, and other biocontrol traits of P. 
fluorescens.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.00985-23
PMCID: PMC10580914
PMID: 37724877

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.