1. Research (Wash D C). 2023 Sep 19;6:0216. doi: 10.34133/research.0216. 
eCollection 2023.

Sleep Promotion by 3-Hydroxy-4-Iminobutyric Acid in Walnut Diaphragma juglandis 
Fructus.

Ji J(1)(2), Ye Y(1), Sheng L(1), Sun J(1), Hong Q(1), Liu C(1), Ding J(3), Geng 
S(4), Xu D(1), Zhang Y(1), Sun X(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, School of Food Science 
and Technology, National Engineering Research Center for Functional Food, 
Synergetic Innovation Center of Food Safety and Quality Control, Jiangnan 
University, Lihu Avenue 1800, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214100, P.R. China.
(2)College of Food Science and Pharmacy, Xinjiang Agricultural University, No. 
311 Nongda Dong Road, Ürümqi, Xinjiang, Uygur Autonomous Region 830052, P.R. 
China.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, P.R. China.
(4)Yunnan Academy of Forestry and Grassland, Kunming, Yunnan 650201, P.R. China.

Insufficient sleep can produce a multitude of deleterious repercussions on 
various domains of human well-being. Concomitantly, the walnut (Juglans 
mandshurica) confers numerous salutary biological activities pertaining to 
sleep. Nevertheless, the sedative and hypnotic capacities of walnut's functional 
constituents remain obscure. In this investigation, we analyzed the sedative and 
hypnotic components of the walnut Diaphragma juglandis fructus and innovatively 
discovered a compound, defined as 3-hydroxy-4-iminobutyric acid (HIBA), which 
disrupts motor activity and enhances sleep duration by regulating the 
neurotransmitters (GABA, DA, etc.) within the brain and serum of mice. 
Subsequently, a metabolomics approach of the serum, basal ganglia, hypothalamus, 
and hippocampus as well as the gut microbiota was undertaken to unravel the 
underlying molecular mechanisms of sleep promotion. Our data reveal that HIBA 
can regulate the metabolism of basal ganglia (sphingolipids, acylcarnitines, 
etc.), possibly in relation to HIBA's influence on the gut microbiome 
(Muribaculum, Bacteroides, Lactobacillus, etc.). Therefore, we introduce a novel 
natural product, HIBA, and explicate the modulation of sleep promotion in mice 
based on the microbiota-gut-brain axis. This study contributes fresh insights 
toward natural product-based sleep research.

Copyright © 2023 Jian Ji et al.

DOI: 10.34133/research.0216
PMCID: PMC10508226
PMID: 37732131