1. Front Fungal Biol. 2022 Feb 9;2:802511. doi: 10.3389/ffunb.2021.802511. 
eCollection 2021.

The First Mitochondrial Genome of Ciborinia camelliae and Its Position in the 
Sclerotiniaceae Family.

Valenti I(1), Degradi L(1), Kunova A(1), Cortesi P(1), Pasquali M(1), Saracchi 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food, Environmental and Nutritional Sciences, University of 
Milan, Milan, Italy.

Ciborinia camelliae is the causal agent of camellia flower blight (CFB). It is a 
hemibiotrophic pathogen, inoperculate Discomycete of the family Sclerotiniaceae. 
It shows host and organ specificity infecting only flowers of species belonging 
to the genus Camellia, causing serious damage to the ornamental component of the 
plant. In this work, the first mitochondrial genome of Ciborinia camellia is 
reported. The mitogenome was obtained by combining Illumina short read and 
Nanopore long read technology. To resolve repetitive elements, specific primers 
were designed and used for Sanger sequencing. The manually curated mitochondrial 
DNA (mtDNA) of the Italian strain DSM 112729 is a circular sequence of 114,660 
bp, with 29.6% of GC content. It contains two ribosomal RNA genes, 33 transfer 
RNAs, one RNase P gene, and 62 protein-coding genes. The latter include one gene 
coding for a ribosomal protein (rps3) and the 14 typical proteins involved in 
the oxidative metabolism. Moreover, a partial mtDNA assembled from a contig list 
was obtained from the deposited genome assembly of a New Zealand strain of C. 
camelliae. The present study contributes to understanding the mitogenome 
arrangement and the evolution of this phytopathogenic fungus in comparison to 
other Sclerotiniaceae species and confirms the usefulness of mitochondrial 
analysis to define phylogenetic positioning of this newly sequenced species.

Copyright Â© 2022 Valenti, Degradi, Kunova, Cortesi, Pasquali and Saracchi.

DOI: 10.3389/ffunb.2021.802511
PMCID: PMC10512376
PMID: 37744111

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.