1. Healthcare (Basel). 2023 Sep 13;11(18):2524. doi: 10.3390/healthcare11182524.

The Effect of Folic Acid Supplementation on Endothelial Function and Arterial 
Stiffness Markers in Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Bokayeva K(1), Jamka M(1), Banaszak M(2), Makarewicz-Bukowska A(1), Adamczak 
A(1), Chrobot M(1), Janicka A(1), Jaworska N(1), Walkowiak J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Metabolic Diseases, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, Szpitalna Str. 27/33, 60-572 Poznań, Poland.
(2)Department of Bromatology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Rokietnicka 
Str. 3, 60-806 Poznań, Poland.

Folic acid might improve endothelial function, but the results are inconclusive. 
This systematic review evaluated the effect of folic acid supplementation on 
endothelial parameters and arterial stiffness in adults. The study protocol was 
registered with the PROSPERO database (CRD42021290195). The PubMed, Web of 
Sciences, Cochrane and Scopus databases were searched to identify 
English-language randomised controlled trials of the effect of folate 
supplementation on arterial stiffness and endothelial function markers in 
adults. There were significant differences between the effect of folic acid and 
placebo on flow-mediated dilation (random-effects model, standardized mean 
differences (SMD): 0.888, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.447, 1.329, p < 0.001) 
and monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (random-effects model, SMD: -1.364, 95% CI: 
-2.164, -0.563, p < 0.001), but there was no significant difference in the 
central pulse wave velocity (fixed-effects model, SMD: -0.069, 95% CI: -0.264, 
0.125, p = 0.485) and peripheral pulse wave velocity (fixed-effects model, SMD: 
-0.093, 95% CI: -0.263, 0.077, p = 0.284). In conclusion, folic acid might have 
a favourable effect on endothelial function but may not affect arterial 
stiffness. Further studies are needed to confirm these results.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare11182524
PMCID: PMC10531078
PMID: 37761721

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.