1. Animals (Basel). 2023 Sep 21;13(18):2982. doi: 10.3390/ani13182982.

Origin, Selection and Current Status of the Utrerana Chicken Breed: A Review.

Plata-Casado A(1), García-Romero C(2), González-Redondo P(3).

Author information:
(1)Consultancy in Organic Agriculture and Holistic Management, 41710 Utrera, 
Spain.
(2)Real Academia de Ciencias Veterinarias, Instituto de España, 28006 Madrid, 
Spain.
(3)Departamento de Agronomía, Universidad de Sevilla, Carretera de Utrera Km 1, 
41013 Seville, Spain.

The conservation of threatened local livestock genetic resources involves 
characterising them to implement conservation strategies. The Utrerana is a 
Mediterranean-type chicken breed, included in the Official Catalogue of 
Livestock Breeds of Spain and in the Domestic Animal Diversity Information 
System (DAD-IS) of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), native to south 
Spain created in 1926 by a farmer from Utrera (Seville province). It was 
selected for laying performance and with four plumage varieties (White, Black, 
Black-barred and Partridge), reaching average yields of 180 eggs per hen per 
year. It was widely used in commercial farming in the second quarter of the 20th 
century, being subsequently displaced in the second half of the 20th century by 
the spreading of the improved foreign breeds and lines. The Utrerana breed was 
reared from then on for its aesthetic values and in backyard systems, being 
endangered with a vulnerable local risk status (1822 birds in 2022 with an 
increasing trend) and having worsened its laying performance as selection for 
productivity ceased. The breed has received little attention from the research 
community. Therefore, this work aims to review the literature on the origin, 
selection, genetic and productive characterisation and status of the populations 
of the breed, as well as the conservation strategies. The Utrerana chicken is a 
polymorphic breed showing high genetic diversity, sexual dimorphism and 
morpho-functional differences among varieties. Currently, Utrerana hens start 
laying at 6 months of age, and a hen lays 94-121 high quality eggs (59-64 g) per 
year, showing seasonality. It is a slow-growing breed with mature weights of 
2.4-2.6 kg for roosters and 1.9-2.0 g for hens. The Utrerana chicken breed is 
rustic and adapted to alternative farming systems. This review has identified 
research gaps to be filled, such as characterising the carcass and meat quality 
of the Utrerana chicken, and evidences the need to make efforts to promote the 
breed and expand its populations.

DOI: 10.3390/ani13182982
PMCID: PMC10525454
PMID: 37760382

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.