1. Molecules. 2023 Sep 21;28(18):6742. doi: 10.3390/molecules28186742.

Potential of Natural Phenolic Compounds as Antimicrobial Agents against 
Multidrug-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus in Chicken Meat.

Morshdy AEMA(1), Abdallah KME(1), Abdallah HE(1), Algahtani FD(2), Elabbasy 
MT(3), Atique S(4), Ahmad K(5), Al-Najjar MAA(6), Abdallah HM(7), Mahmoud 
AFA(1).

Author information:
(1)Food Hygiene, Safety, and Technology Department, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Zagazig University, Zagazig 44519, Egypt.
(2)Department of Public Health, College of Public Health and Health Informatics, 
University of Hail, Ha'il 81451, Saudi Arabia.
(3)College of Medicine, University of Ha'il, Ha'il 55473, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Public Health Science, Faculty of Landscape and Society, 
Norwegian University of Life Sciences, 1430 Ã…s, Norway.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan 38541, Republic 
of Korea.
(6)Faculty of Pharmacy, Applied Science Private University, Amman 11193, Jordan.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Zagazig 
University, Zagazig 44519, Egypt.

Staphylococcus aureus is one of the most widespread foodborne bacteria that 
cause high morbidity, mortality, and economic loss, primarily if foodborne 
diseases are caused by pathogenic and multidrug-resistant (MDR) strains. This 
study aimed to determine the prevalence of S. aureus in chicken meat in Egyptian 
markets. Thus, this study might be the first to assess the efficiency of 
different natural phenolic compounds as novel antibacterial agents against MDR 
S. aureus pathogens isolated from raw chicken meat in the Egyptian market. The 
incidence and quantification of pathogenic S. aureus were detected in retail raw 
chicken meat parts (breast, thigh, fillet, and giblets). In total, 73 out of 80 
(91.3%) of the chicken meat parts were contaminated, with S. aureus as the only 
species isolated. Of the 192 identified S. aureus isolates, 143 were 
coagulase-positive S. aureus and 117 isolates were MDR (81.8%, 117/143). 
Twenty-two antibiotic resistance profile patterns were detected. One strain was 
randomly selected from each pattern to further analyze virulence and resistance 
genes. Extracted DNA was assessed for the presence of antibiotic-resistance 
genes, i.e., vancomycin-resistance (vanA), aminoglycosides-resistance 
(aacA-aphD), apramycin-resistance (apmA), and methicillin-resistance (mecA), 
penicillin-resistance (blaZ), and virulence genes staphylococcal enterotoxins 
(sea and seb), Panton-Valentine leucocidin (pvl), clumping factor A (clfA), and 
toxic shock syndrome toxin (tst). Clustering analyses revealed that six S. 
aureus strains harbored the most virulence and resistance genes. The activity of 
hydroquinone was significantly higher than thymol, carvacrol, eugenol, and 
protocatechuic acid. Therefore, phenolic compounds, particularly hydroquinone, 
could potentially alternate with conventional antibiotics against the pathogenic 
MDR S. aureus inhabiting raw chicken meat. Hence, this study indicates that 
urgent interventions are necessary to improve hygiene for safer meat in Egyptian 
markets. Moreover, hydroquinone could be a natural phenolic compound for 
inhibiting foodborne pathogens.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules28186742
PMCID: PMC10535414
PMID: 37764518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.