1. Sci Rep. 2023 Sep 30;13(1):16425. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-42600-5.

Effect of recombination on genetic diversity of Caenorhabditis elegans.

Hwang HY(1), Wang J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Department of Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA. hoyon.hwang@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Department of Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA. jiouw@jhu.edu.

Greater molecular divergence and genetic diversity are present in regions of 
high recombination in many species. Studies describing the correlation between 
variant abundance and recombination rate have long focused on recombination in 
the context of linked selection models, whereby interference between linked 
sites under positive or negative selection reduces genetic diversity in regions 
of low recombination. Here, we show that indels, especially those of 
intermediate sizes, are enriched relative to single nucleotide polymorphisms in 
regions of high recombination in C. elegans. To explain this phenomenon, we 
reintroduce an alternative model that emphasizes the mutagenic effect of 
recombination. To extend the analysis, we examine the variants with a 
phylogenetic context and discuss how different models could be examined 
together. The number of variants generated by recombination in natural 
populations could be substantial including possibly the majority of some indel 
subtypes. Our work highlights the potential importance of a mutagenic effect of 
recombination, which could have a significant role in the shaping of natural 
genetic diversity.

Â© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-42600-5
PMCID: PMC10542817
PMID: 37777524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.