1. Int J Biol Sci. 2023 Sep 18;19(15):4967-4988. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.87332. 
eCollection 2023.

Acteoside ameliorates hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury via reversing the 
senescent fate of liver sinusoidal endothelial cells and restoring compromised 
sinusoidal networks.

Jia K(1), Zhang Y(1), Luo R(1), Liu R(2), Li Y(1), Wu J(1), Xie K(1), Liu J(1), 
Li S(2), Zhou F(1), Li X(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, 
100029, China.
(2)School of Chinese Materia Medica, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, 
Beijing, 100029, China.

Hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury (HIRI), a common two-phase intersocietal 
reaction in liver surgery, typically leading to sustained liver dysfunction. 
During this process, liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) are vulnerable 
to damage and exert senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). However, 
how these SASP-LSECs secreted damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) to 
impact the whole HIRI microenvironment and whether it can be reversed by 
therapeutics remains unknown. Here, we found that either HIRI surgery or hypoxia 
and reoxygenation (HR) stimulation forced LSECs into SASP and expressed 
HMGB1-dominated DAMPs, which were dramatically improved by acteoside (ACT). 
Additionally, hypoxic hepatocytes released excessive HMGB1 to LSECs and 
synergistically aggravated their SASP state. Mechanistically, HMGB1 bound with 
TLR3/TLR4 on LSECs, promoted the nuclear translocation of IRF1 and subsequent 
transcription of cxcl1 and Hmgb1, leading to the chemotaxis of neutrophils and 
accelerating immune damage in a vicious circle. Notably, ACT or HMGB1 siRNA 
effectively disrupted HMGB1-TLR3/4 interaction, leading to IRF1 inhibition and 
repairing LSEC functions, which was largely reversed by HMGB1 stimulation and 
IRF1-overexpressed liposomes with LSECs-targeted hyaluronic acid-derivative 
conjugated in mice. Collectively, ACT reversed the senescent fate of LSECs and 
restored sinusoidal networks by targeting HMGB1-TLR3/4-IRF1 signaling, thus 
providing protection against HIRI and offering the potential for new 
therapeutics development.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.87332
PMCID: PMC10539705
PMID: 37781526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.