1. J Am Chem Soc. 2023 Oct 11;145(40):21841-21850. doi: 10.1021/jacs.3c05704.
Epub  2023 Oct 2.

Ratiometric Fluorescent Sensors Illuminate Cellular Magnesium Imbalance in a 
Model of Acetaminophen-Induced Liver Injury.

Brady M(1), Shchepetkina VI(1), González-Recio I(2), Martínez-Chantar ML(2)(3), 
Buccella D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York, New York 10003, 
United States.
(2)Liver Disease Lab, Center for Cooperative Research in Biosciences (CIC 
bioGUNE), Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Bizkaia Technology 
Park, Building 801A, 48160 Derio, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y 
Digestivas (CIBERehd), Carlos III National Health Institute, 28029 Madrid, 
Spain.

Magnesium(II) plays catalytic, structural, regulatory, and signaling roles in 
living organisms. Abnormal levels of this metal have been associated with 
numerous pathologies, including cardiovascular disease, diabetes, metabolic 
syndrome, immunodeficiency, cancer, and, most recently, liver pathologies 
affecting humans. The role of Mg2+ in the pathophysiology of liver disease, 
however, has been occluded by concomitant changes in concentration of 
interfering divalent cations, such as Ca2+, which complicates the interpretation 
of experiments conducted with existing molecular Mg2+ indicators. Herein, we 
introduce a new quinoline-based fluorescent sensor, MagZet1, that displays a 
shift in its excitation and emission wavelengths, affording ratiometric 
detection of cellular Mg2+ by both fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry. 
The new sensor binds the target metal with a submillimolar dissociation 
constant─well suited for detection of changes in free Mg2+ in cells─and displays 
a 10-fold selectivity against Ca2+. Furthermore, the fluorescence ratio is 
insensitive to changes in pH in the physiological range, providing an overall 
superior performance over existing indicators. We provide insights into the 
metal selectivity profile of the new sensor based on computational modeling, and 
we apply it to shed light on a decrease in cytosolic free Mg2+ and altered 
expression of metal transporters in cellular models of drug-induced liver injury 
caused by acetaminophen overdose.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.3c05704
PMCID: PMC10571084
PMID: 37782839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.