1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Sep 20:2023.09.20.558674. doi: 
10.1101/2023.09.20.558674.

The RNA-binding domain of hnRNP U extends beyond the RGG/RG motifs.

Kletzien OA(1), Wuttke DS(1), Batey RT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0596, 
USA.

Update in
    Biochemistry. 2024 Feb 8. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.3c00510.

Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein U (hnRNP U) is a ubiquitously expressed 
protein that regulates chromatin architecture through its interactions with 
numerous DNA, protein, and RNA partners. The RNA-binding domain (RBD) of hnRNP U 
was previously mapped to an RGG/RG element within its disordered C-terminal 
region, but little is understood about its binding mode and potential for 
selective RNA recognition. Analysis of publicly available hnRNP U enhanced UV 
crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (eCLIP) data identified high-confidence 
binding sites within human RNAs. We synthesized a set of diverse RNAs 
encompassing eleven of these identified crosslink sites for biochemical 
characterization using a combination of fluorescence anisotropy and 
electrophoretic mobility shift assays. These in vitro binding experiments with a 
rationally designed set of RNAs and hnRNP U domains revealed that the RGG/RG 
element is a small part of a more expansive RBD that encompasses most of the 
disordered C-terminal region. This RBD contains a second, previously 
experimentally uncharacterized RGG/RG element with RNA-binding properties 
comparable to the canonical RGG/RG element. These RGG/RG elements serve 
redundant functions, with neither serving as the primary RBD. While in isolation 
each RGG/RG element has modest affinity for RNA, together they significantly 
enhance the association of hnRNP U with RNA, enabling binding of most of the 
designed RNA set with low to mid-nanomolar binding affinities. Identification 
and characterization of the complete hnRNP U RBD highlights the perils of a 
reductionist approach to defining biochemical activities in this system and 
paves the way for a detailed investigation of its RNA-binding specificity.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.09.20.558674
PMCID: PMC10541603
PMID: 37786719