1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Nov 10;51(20):10992-11009. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad803.

Compartmentalization of androgen receptors at endogenous genes in living cells.

Yavuz S(1), Kabbech H(2), van Staalduinen J(2), Linder S(3), van Cappellen 
WA(4), Nigg AL(4), Abraham TE(4), Slotman JA(4), Quevedo M(2), Poot RA(2), Zwart 
W(3)(5), van Royen ME(1), Grosveld FG(2), Smal I(2), Houtsmuller AB(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Division of Oncogenomics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Erasmus Optical Imaging Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(5)Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Institute for Complex Molecular Systems, 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 
Eindhoven, The Netherlands.

A wide range of nuclear proteins are involved in the spatio-temporal 
organization of the genome through diverse biological processes such as gene 
transcription and DNA replication. Upon stimulation by testosterone and 
translocation to the nucleus, multiple androgen receptors (ARs) accumulate in 
microscopically discernable foci which are irregularly distributed in the 
nucleus. Here, we investigated the formation and physical nature of these foci, 
by combining novel fluorescent labeling techniques to visualize a defined 
chromatin locus of AR-regulated genes-PTPRN2 or BANP-simultaneously with either 
AR foci or individual AR molecules. Quantitative colocalization analysis showed 
evidence of AR foci formation induced by R1881 at both PTPRN2 and BANP loci. 
Furthermore, single-particle tracking (SPT) revealed three distinct subdiffusive 
fractional Brownian motion (fBm) states: immobilized ARs were observed near the 
labeled genes likely as a consequence of DNA-binding, while the intermediate 
confined state showed a similar spatial behavior but with larger displacements, 
suggesting compartmentalization by liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS), while 
freely mobile ARs were diffusing in the nuclear environment. All together, we 
show for the first time in living cells the presence of AR-regulated genes in AR 
foci.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkad803
PMCID: PMC10639085
PMID: 37791849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]