1. Transl Oncol. 2023 Dec;38:101794. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2023.101794. Epub 2023
 Oct 9.

Charting new frontiers: Co-inhibitory immune checkpoint proteins in 
therapeutics, biomarkers, and drug delivery systems in cancer care.

Xiao Y(1), Li ZZ(1), Zhong NN(1), Cao LM(1), Liu B(2), Bu LL(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral & Maxillofacial Reconstruction and Regeneration, 
Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, Hubei Key Laboratory 
of Stomatology, School & Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
430079, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Oral & Maxillofacial Reconstruction and Regeneration, 
Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, Hubei Key Laboratory 
of Stomatology, School & Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
430079, China; Department of Oral & Maxillofacial - Head Neck Oncology, School & 
Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430079, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Oral & Maxillofacial Reconstruction and Regeneration, 
Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, Hubei Key Laboratory 
of Stomatology, School & Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
430079, China; Department of Oral & Maxillofacial - Head Neck Oncology, School & 
Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430079, China. Electronic 
address: lin-lin.bu@whu.edu.cn.

Cancer remains a major health concern globally. Immune checkpoint inhibitors 
(ICIs) target co-inhibitory immune checkpoint molecules and have received 
approval for treating malignancies like melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer. 
While CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L1 are extensively researched, additional targets such 
as LAG-3, TIGIT, TIM-3, and VISTA have also demonstrated effective in cancer 
therapy. Combination treatments, which pair ICIs with interventions such as 
radiation or chemotherapy, amplify therapeutic outcomes. However, ICIs can lead 
to diverse side effects, and their varies across patients and cancers. Hence, 
identifying predictive biomarkers to guide therapy is essential. Notably, 
expression levels of molecules like PD-1, CTLA-4, and LAG-3 have been linked to 
tumor progression and ICI therapy responsiveness. Recent advancements in drug 
delivery systems (DDSs) further enhance ICI therapy efficacy. This review 
explores predominant DDSs for ICI delivery, such as hydrogel, microparticle, and 
nanoparticle, which offer improved therapeutic effects and reduced toxicity. In 
summary, we discuss the future of immune therapy focusing on co-inhibitory 
checkpoint molecules, pinpoint challenges, and suggest avenues for developing 
efficient, safer DDSs for ICI transport.

Copyright Â© 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tranon.2023.101794
PMCID: PMC10582482
PMID: 37820473

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.