1. Sci Rep. 2023 Oct 12;13(1):17292. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-44379-x.

METTL3/IGF2BP2 axis affects the progression of colorectal cancer by regulating 
m6A modification of STAG3.

Yi J(1), Peng F(1), Zhao J(2), Gong X(3).

Author information:
(1)The Department of General Surgery 2, Zhuzhou Central Hospital (Zhuzhou 
Hospital Affiliated to Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University), 
116 Changjiang South Road, Tianyuan District, Zhuzhou, 412007, Hunan, China.
(2)The Department of Operating Room, Zhuzhou Central Hospital (Zhuzhou Hospital 
Affiliated to Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University), Zhuzhou, 
412007, China.
(3)The Department of General Surgery 2, Zhuzhou Central Hospital (Zhuzhou 
Hospital Affiliated to Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University), 
116 Changjiang South Road, Tianyuan District, Zhuzhou, 412007, Hunan, China. 
gongxiaosong0418@163.com.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is among the commonest malignant tumors of humans. 
Existing evidence has linked the poor prognosis of CRC with high expression of 
stromal antigen 3 (STAG3), but, the exact biological effect of STAG3 in CRC is 
still unclear. The aim of this research is to reveal the biological function and 
molecular mechanism of STAG3 in CRC. To investigate the differential expression 
of STAG3 in CRC tissues and cell lines compared to normal colon tissues and cell 
lines, Western blot (WB) and quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) techniques 
were utilized. STAG3 N6-methyladenosine (m6A) modification level were identified 
using m6A RNA immunoprecipitation (MeRIP). Additionally, the functional roles of 
methyltransferase-like protein 3 (METTL3) and insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA 
binding protein 2 (IGF2BP2) in CRC were explored by manipulating their levels 
via knockdown or overexpression. Cell proliferation was evaluated through Cell 
Counting Kit 8 (CCK-8) and clone formation experiments, while cell migration was 
assessed through wound healing experiments. Furthermore, cell apoptosis was 
detected using flow cytometry, and the protein expressions associated with 
proliferation and apoptosis were detected using WB. To identify the specific 
binding of target genes, RIP and pull-down assays were employed. Finally, the 
biological function of STAG3 in vivo was investigated through a 
xenotransplantation mouse tumor model. In CRC tissues and cell lines, STAG3 was 
up-regulated and accompanied by m6A methylation. Additionally, the expression of 
METTL3 was found to be upregulated in CRC tissues. Knocking down METTL3 resulted 
in a decrease in both the m6A level and protein expression of STAG3, inhibited 
cell proliferation and migration while promoting apoptosis, which were restored 
through STAG3 overexpression. Furthermore, online prediction indicated the 
interaction between STAG3 mRNA and IGF2BP2 protein, which was further verified 
by RIP experiments. IGF2BP2 downregulation led to decreased STAG3 protein 
expression, cell proliferation, and migration, but increased apoptosis. However, 
these impacts were reversed by STAG3 overexpression. Finally, subcutaneous tumor 
experiments conducted in nude mice also confirmed that METTL3 regulated CRC 
progression through STAG3 in vivo. The METTL3/IGF2BP2/STAG3 axis affects CRC 
progression in an m6A modification-dependent manner. This may guide targeted 
therapy in CRC patients.

Â© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-44379-x
PMCID: PMC10570365
PMID: 37828232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.