1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2023 Sep 26;11:1254356. doi: 
10.3389/fbioe.2023.1254356. eCollection 2023.

Engineered exosomes as drug and RNA co-delivery system: new hope for enhanced 
therapeutics?

Chen H(#)(1)(2), Yao H(#)(1)(2), Chi J(1), Li C(1)(2), Liu Y(1)(2), Yang 
J(1)(2), Yu J(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Ruan Y(1), Pi J(1)(2)(3), Xu JF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Diagnostics, The 
First Dongguan Affiliated Hospital, Guangdong Medical University, Dongguan, 
Guangdong, China.
(2)Institute of Laboratory Medicine, School of Medical Technology, Guangdong 
Medical University, Dongguan, Guangdong, China.
(3)The Marine Biomedical Research Institute, Guangdong Medical University, 
Zhanjiang, Guangdong, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Chemotherapy often faces some obstacles such as low targeting effects and drug 
resistance, which introduce the low therapeutic efficiency and strong side 
effects. Recent advances in nanotechnology allows the use of novel nanosystems 
for targeted drug delivery, although the chemically synthesized nanomaterials 
always show unexpected low biocompability. The emergence of exosome research has 
offered a better understanding of disease treatment and created novel 
opportunities for developing effective drug delivery systems with high 
biocompability. Moreover, RNA interference has emerged as a promising strategy 
for disease treatments by selectively knocking down or over-expressing specific 
genes, which allows new possibilities to directly control cell signaling events 
or drug resistance. Recently, more and more interests have been paid to develop 
optimal delivery nanosystems with high efficiency and high biocompability for 
drug and functional RNA co-delivery to achieve enhanced chemotherapy. In light 
of the challenges for developing drug and RNA co-delivery system, exosomes have 
been found to show very attractive prospects. This review aims to explore 
current technologies and challenges in the use of exosomes as drug and RNA 
co-delivery system with a focus on the emerging trends and issues associated 
with their further applications, which may contribute to the accelerated 
developments of exosome-based theraputics.

Copyright Â© 2023 Chen, Yao, Chi, Li, Liu, Yang, Yu, Wang, Ruan, Pi and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2023.1254356
PMCID: PMC10562639
PMID: 37823027

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.