1. J Virol. 2023 Nov 30;97(11):e0107523. doi: 10.1128/jvi.01075-23. Epub 2023 Oct
 17.

Coxsackievirus A6 2C protein antagonizes IFN-β production through MDA5 and RIG-I 
depletion.

Wang S-H(1)(2), Du J(1)(2), Yu J(1)(2), Zhao Y(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Hua S(3), 
Zhao K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of Infectious Diseases and Pathogen Biology, First Hospital of Jilin 
University , Changchun, China.
(2)Institute of Virology and AIDS Research, First Hospital of Jilin University , 
Changchun, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, First Hospital of Jilin University , 
Changchun, China.

Coxsackievirus A6 (CV-A6) is a major emerging pathogen associated with atypical 
hand, foot, and mouth disease and can cause serious complications such as 
encephalitis, acute flaccid paralysis, and neurorespiratory syndrome. Therefore, 
revealing the associated pathogenic mechanisms could benefit the control of 
CV-A6 infections. In this study, we demonstrate that the nonstructural 2CCV-A6 
suppresses IFN-β production, which supports CV-A6 infection. This is achieved by 
depleting RNA sensors such as melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 and 
retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) through the lysosomal pathway. Such a 
function is shared by 2CEV-A71 and 2CCV-B3 but not 2CCV-A16, suggesting the 
latter might have an alternative way to promote viral replication. This study 
broadens our understanding of enterovirus 2C protein regulation of the 
RIG-I-like receptor signaling pathway and reveals a novel mechanism by which 
CV-A6 and other enteroviruses evade the host innate immune response. These 
findings on 2C may provide new therapeutic targets for the development of 
effective inhibitors against CV-A6 and other enterovirus infections.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.01075-23
PMCID: PMC10688345
PMID: 37847581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.