1. Cells. 2023 Oct 20;12(20):2496. doi: 10.3390/cells12202496.

Mitophagy in Astrocytes Is Required for the Health of Optic Nerve.

Yazdankhah M(1), Ghosh S(1), Liu H(1), Hose S(1), Zigler JS Jr(2), Sinha 
D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, The Wilmer Eye Institute, The Johns Hopkins 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Comment in
    Cells. 2024 Feb 06;13(4):297. doi: 10.3390/cells13040297.

Mitochondrial dysfunction in astrocytes has been implicated in the development 
of various neurological disorders. Mitophagy, mitochondrial autophagy, is 
required for proper mitochondrial function by preventing the accumulation of 
damaged mitochondria. The importance of mitophagy, specifically in the 
astrocytes of the optic nerve (ON), has been little studied. We introduce an 
animal model in which two separate mutations act synergistically to produce 
severe ON degeneration. The first mutation is in Cryba1, which encodes 
Î²A3/A1-crystallin, a lens protein also expressed in astrocytes, where it 
regulates lysosomal pH. The second mutation is in Bckdk, which encodes 
branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase kinase, which is ubiquitously expressed in 
the mitochondrial matrix and involved in the catabolism of the branched-chain 
amino acids. BCKDK is essential for mitochondrial function and the amelioration 
of oxidative stress. Neither of the mutations in isolation has a significant 
effect on the ON, but animals homozygous for both mutations (DM) exhibit very 
serious ON degeneration. ON astrocytes from these double-mutant (DM) animals 
have lysosomal defects, including impaired mitophagy, and dysfunctional 
mitochondria. Urolithin A can rescue the mitophagy impairment in DM astrocytes 
and reduce ON degeneration. These data demonstrate that efficient mitophagy in 
astrocytes is required for ON health and functional integrity.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12202496
PMCID: PMC10605486
PMID: 37887340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.