1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2023 Dec;43(12):2312-2332. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.123.318974. Epub 2023 Oct 26.

Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals Crucial Cell Subsets and Functional 
Heterogeneity Associated With Carotid Atherosclerosis and Cerebrovascular 
Events.

Tan J(#)(1)(2)(3), Liang Y(#)(4)(2)(3), Yang Z(#)(2)(5), He Q(#)(1), Tong 
J(4)(2), Deng Y(4)(3), Guo W(1), Liang K(1), Tang J(4)(2), Shi W(1)(2), Yu 
B(1)(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Vascular Surgery Division, General Surgery Department, Huashan Hospital 
Affiliated to Fudan University, Shanghai, China (J. Tan, Q.H., W.G., K.L., W.S., 
B.Y.).
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Vascular Lesions Regulation and Remodeling, China 
(J. Tan, Y.L., Z.Y., J. Tong, J. Tang, W.S., B.Y.).
(3)Fudan Zhangjiang Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai, China (J. Tan, Y.L., 
Y.D.).
(4)Department of Vascular Surgery, Shanghai Pudong Hospital, Fudan University 
Pudong Medical Center, China (Y.L., J. Tong, Y.D., J. Tang, B.Y.).
(5)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, 
China (Z.Y.).
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Carotid atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disorder and is 
responsible for the vast majority of ischemic strokes. Inappropriate innate and 
adaptive immune responses synergize with malfunctional vascular wall cells to 
cause atherosclerotic lesions. Yet, functional characteristics of specific 
immune and endothelial cell subsets associated with atherosclerosis and 
cerebrovascular events are poorly understood.
METHODS: Here, using single-cell RNA sequencing, the unprecedentedly largest 
data set from 20 patients' carotid artery plaques and paired peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells was generated, with which an ultra-high-precision cellular 
landscape of the atherosclerotic microenvironment involving 372â€‰070 cells was 
depicted.
RESULTS: Compared with peripheral blood mononuclear cells, 3 plaque-specific 
T-cell subsets exhibiting proatherogenic features of both activation and 
exhaustion were identified. Strikingly, usually antiatherogenic, CD4+FOXP3+ 
regulatory T cells from plaques of patients with symptomatic disease acquired 
proinflammatory properties by probably converting to T helper 17 and T helper 9 
cells, while CD4+NR4A1+/C0 and CD8+SLC4A10+ T cells related to cerebrovascular 
events possessed atherogenic attributes including proinflammation, polarization, 
and exhaustion. In addition, monocyte-macrophage dynamics dominated innate 
immune response. Two plaque-specific monocyte subsets performed diametrically 
opposed functions, EREG+ monocytes promoted cerebrovascular events while C3+ 
monocytes are anti-inflammatory. Similarly, IGF1+ and HS3ST2+ macrophages with 
classical proinflammatory M1 macrophage features were annotated and contributed 
to cerebrovascular events. Moreover, SULF1+ (sulfatase-1) endothelial cells were 
also found to participate in cerebrovascular events through affecting plaque 
vulnerability.
CONCLUSIONS: This compendium of single-cell transcriptome data provides valuable 
insights into the cellular heterogeneity of the atherosclerotic microenvironment 
and the development of more precise cardiovascular immunotherapies.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.123.318974
PMCID: PMC10659258
PMID: 37881939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures None.