1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Oct 18;24(20):15280. doi: 10.3390/ijms242015280.

Overexpression of Lolium multiflorum LmMYB1 Enhances Drought Tolerance in 
Transgenic Arabidopsis.

Liu Q(1)(2), Wang F(1), Li P(1), Yu G(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Grassland Science and Technology, Sichuan Agricultural University, 
Chengdu 611130, China.
(2)Institute of Agricultural Resources and Environment, Sichuan Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Chengdu 610066, China.

Lolium multiflorum is one of the world-famous forage grasses with rich biomass, 
fast growth rate and good nutritional quality. However, its growth and forage 
yield are often affected by drought, which is a major natural disaster all over 
the world. MYB transcription factors have some specific roles in response to 
drought stress, such as regulation of stomatal development and density, control 
of cell wall and root development. However, the biological function of MYB in L. 
multiflorum remains unclear. Previously, we elucidated the role of LmMYB1 in 
enhancing osmotic stress resistance in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Here, this 
study elucidates the biological function of LmMYB1 in enhancing plant drought 
tolerance through an ABA-dependent pathway involving the regulation of cell wall 
development and stomatal density. After drought stress and ABA stress, the 
expression of LmMYB1 in L. multiflorum was significantly increased. 
Overexpression of LmMYB1 increased the survival rate of Arabidopsis thaliana 
under drought stress. Under drought conditions, expression levels of 
drought-responsive genes such as AtRD22, AtRAB and AtAREB were up-regulated in 
OE compared with those in WT. Further observation showed that the stomatal 
density of OE was reduced, which was associated with the up-regulated expression 
of cell wall-related pathway genes in the RNA-Seq results. In conclusion, this 
study confirmed the biological function of LmMYB1 in improving drought tolerance 
by mediating cell wall development through the ABA-dependent pathway and thereby 
affecting stomatal density.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms242015280
PMCID: PMC10607481
PMID: 37894960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.