1. Microorganisms. 2023 Sep 29;11(10):2450. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms11102450.

Validating Interactions of Pathogenic Proteins of Staphylococcus aureus and E. 
coli with Phytochemicals of Ziziphus jujube and Acacia nilotica.

Zou W(1), Hassan I(2), Akram B(2), Sattar H(2), Altaf A(2), Aqib AI(3), Aslam 
HB(4), Almutairi MH(5), Li K(1).

Author information:
(1)MOE Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health and Food Safety, 
Institute of Traditional Chinese Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.
(2)Center for Research in Molecular Medicine (CRiMM), Institute of Molecular 
Biology and Biotechnology (IMBB), The University of Lahore, Lahore 54590, 
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Medicine, Cholistan University of Veterinary and Animal 
Sciences, Bahawalpur 63100, Pakistan.
(4)Institute of Microbiology, University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, 
Lahore 54000, Pakistan.
(5)Zoology Department, College of Science, King Saud University, P.O. Box 2455, 
Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.

This study focused on the assessment of the antimicrobial resistance of 
Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) and Escherichia coli (E. coli) isolated from 
bovine mastitis milk samples and the revealing anti-mastitis potential of 
phytocompounds of Ziziphus jujube and Acacia nilotica through molecular docking 
analysis. The mastitis milk samples were collected from various dairy farms for 
the isolation of the bacteria (S. aureus and E. coli) and their response to 
antibiotics. Ethanolic extracts of both plants were prepared. Their 
antibacterial activity was evaluated, and they were processed for phytochemical 
analysis after which, molecular docking analysis with pathogenic proteins of the 
bacteria was carried out. Parametric and non-parametric statistical analyses 
were performed to reach the conclusions of this study. The findings of the study 
revealed a higher drug resistance (â‰¥40%) of E. coli against ampicillin, 
amikacin, and vancomycin, while S. aureus exhibited the highest resistance to 
ampicillin, erythromycin, and ciprofloxacin. The ethanolic extracts of the 
Ziziphus jujube and Acacia nilotica plants produced a ZOI between 18 and 23 mm 
against multidrug-resistant S. aureus and E. coli. Gas chromatography-mass 
spectrophotometry (GC-MS) was used to explore 15 phytocompounds from Ziziphus 
jujube and 18 phytocompounds from Acacia nilotica. The molecular docking 
analysis of 2cyclopenten-1-one,3,4,4 trimethyl and Bis (2ethylhexyl) phthalate 
of Ziziphus jujube showed a binding affinity of -4.8 kcal/mol and -5.3 kcal/mol 
and -5.9 kcal/mol and -7.1 kcal/mol against the DNA Gyrase and toxic shock 
syndrome toxin-1 proteins of S. aureus and E. coli, respectively. The suberic 
acid monomethyl ester of Acacia nilotica showed a binding affinity of -5.9 
kcal/mol and -5 kcal/mol against the outer membrane protein A and Topoisomerase 
IV protein of E. coli and -5.1 kcal/mol and -5.8 kcal/mol against the toxic 
shock syndrome toxin-1 and Enterotoxin B proteins of S. aureus. Similarly, 
2,2,4-trimethyl-1,3-pentanediol di-iso-butyrate showed a binding affinity of 
-6.5 kcal/mol and -5.3 kcal/mol against the outer membrane protein A and 
Topoisomerase IV of E. coli and -5.2 kcal/mol and -5.9 kcal/mol against the 
toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 and Enterotoxin B proteins of S. aureus, 
respectively. The study concluded that there was an increasing trend for the 
antimicrobial resistance of S. aureus and E. coli, while the Ziziphus jujube and 
Acacia nilotica plant extracts expressed significant affinity to tackle this 
resistance; hence, this calls for the development of novel evidence-based 
therapeutics.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms11102450
PMCID: PMC10609126
PMID: 37894108

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.