1. Molecules. 2023 Oct 17;28(20):7139. doi: 10.3390/molecules28207139.

Revealing Allosteric Mechanism of Amino Acid Binding Proteins from Open to 
Closed State.

Shi Q(1), Liu L(1), Duan H(2), Jiang Y(1), Luo W(1), Sun G(1), Ge Y(1), Liang 
L(1), Liu W(1), Shi H(2), Hu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Medicinal and Edible Plants Resources Development of 
Sichuan Education Department, School of Pharmacy, Chengdu University, Chengdu 
610106, China.
(2)Laboratory of Integrative Medicine, Clinical Research Center for Breast, 
State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University and 
Collaborative Innovation Center, Chengdu 610041, China.

Amino acid binding proteins (AABPs) undergo significant conformational closure 
in the periplasmic space of Gram-negative bacteria, tightly binding specific 
amino acid substrates and then initiating transmembrane transport of nutrients. 
Nevertheless, the possible closure mechanisms after substrate binding, 
especially long-range signaling, remain unknown. Taking three typical 
AABPs-glutamine binding protein (GlnBP), histidine binding protein (HisJ) and 
lysine/arginine/ornithine binding protein (LAOBP) in Escherichia coli (E. 
coli)-as research subjects, a series of theoretical studies including sequence 
alignment, Gaussian network model (GNM), anisotropic network model (ANM), 
conventional molecular dynamics (cMD) and neural relational inference molecular 
dynamics (NRI-MD) simulations were carried out. Sequence alignment showed that 
GlnBP, HisJ and LAOBP have high structural similarity. According to the results 
of the GNM and ANM, AABPs' Index Finger and Thumb domains exhibit closed motion 
tendencies that contribute to substrate capture and stable binding. Based on cMD 
trajectories, the Index Finger domain, especially the I-Loop region, exhibits 
high molecular flexibility, with residues 11 and 117 both being potentially key 
residues for receptor-ligand recognition and initiation of receptor allostery. 
Finally, the signaling pathway of AABPs' conformational closure was revealed by 
NRI-MD training and trajectory reconstruction. This work not only provides a 
complete picture of AABPs' recognition mechanism and possible conformational 
closure, but also aids subsequent structure-based design of small-molecule 
oncology drugs.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules28207139
PMCID: PMC10609312
PMID: 37894619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest, 
financial or otherwise.