1. Sci Rep. 2023 Oct 31;13(1):18672. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-45823-8.

Deciphering morphological and biochemical responses of Salvia leriifolia to seed 
cold plasma treatment, priming, and foliar spraying with nano-salicylic acid.

Ghodsimaab SP(1), Ghasimi Hagh Z(2), Makarian H(1), Gholipoor M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agronomy and Plant Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture, Shahrood 
University of Technology, Shahrood, 3619995161, Iran.
(2)Department of Horticulture Science and Plant Protection, Faculty of 
Agriculture, Shahrood University of Technology, Shahrood, 3619995161, Iran. 
z_ghasimi@yahoo.com.

The pretreatment of seeds with cold plasma (CP) (0 and 100 w for 240 s), and 
salicylic acid priming (SA) (0 and 2 mM normal and nano form), and foliar 
spraying of SA at the six-leaf stage (0 and 2 mM normal and nano form) of Salvia 
leriifolia plants in field condition was studied. Compared to the control plants 
of S. leriifolia, the results showed that CP + both forms of SA 
priming + nano-SA spraying increased plant height, leaf length, plant dry 
weight, total phenol, and the activities of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) 
and tyrosine ammonia-lyase (TAL) enzymes. The chlorophyll a and b contents in 
all treated plants remained either unchanged or decreased when compared to the 
control. The highest PAL activity was obtained in 
CP-free + hydro-priming + nano-SA foliar spraying. The highest content of 
caffeic acid was achieved in CP + SA priming + SA foliar spraying in the leaf. 
The maximum contents of rosmarinic and salvianolic acid were obtained in the 
control plants. In conclusion, CP and nano-SA can increase PAL and TAL activity 
and total phenol accumulation in S. leriifolia plants, but not rosmarinic and 
salvianolic acid contents. Other phenolic compound enzymes and their production 
require further study.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-45823-8
PMCID: PMC10618475
PMID: 37907628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.