1. Sci Rep. 2023 Nov 1;13(1):18807. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-46117-9.

Causal effect of gallstone disease on the risk of coronary heart disease or 
acute myocardial infarction: a Mendelian randomization study.

Fu Q(#)(1), Shen T(#)(1), Yu Q(1), Jiang L(1), Yang R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanchang University, Nanchang, 330006, China.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanchang University, Nanchang, 330006, China. yangrenqiangcn@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Gallstone disease (GSD) is thought to be associated with the risk of coronary 
heart disease (CHD) or acute myocardial infarction (AMI), which may be due to 
abnormal cholesterol metabolism. We used multiple Mendelian randomization (MR) 
methods based on publicly available genome-wide association study data to assess 
whether this association is genetically causal and to search for loci driving 
causality. Pooled data for GSD were obtained from FinnGen Biobank and Biobank 
Japan, while CHD and AMI were obtained as pooled data from the CARDIoGRAMplusC4D 
consortium. In this MR study, we found a significant negative causal effect of 
genetic susceptibility to GSD on AMI in the Finnish population, but no causal 
effect was found on CHD. This causal effect was not confounded by reverse 
causality and the same findings were obtained in the Japanese population. 
Furthermore, the negative causal effect of GSD on AMI risk may be driven by the 
rs4245791-regulated ABCG5/8 protein. In conclusion, the results of this MR study 
support a negative causal effect of GSD on AMI and suggest that rs4245791 is the 
causal driver locus of this effect, which provides new ideas and evidence for 
the prevention and etiologic study of AMI in patients with GSD.

Â© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-46117-9
PMCID: PMC10620410
PMID: 37914780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.