1. Front Genet. 2023 Oct 17;14:1272028. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1272028. 
eCollection 2023.

Case report: Paternal uniparental disomy on chromosome 7 and homozygous SUGCT 
mutation in a fetus with overweight after birth.

Bu X(#)(1), Li X(#)(2), Peng C(1), Li H(1), Zhou S(1), Zhu Z(3), He J(1), 
Linpeng S(1).

Author information:
(1)Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Regional Hereditary Birth Defects 
Prevention and Control, Changsha Hospital for Maternal and Child Health Care 
Affiliated to Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China.
(2)Department of Physiology, Changsha Health Vocational College, Changsha, 
China.
(3)Technical Support Center, Zhejiang Biosan Biochemical Technologies Co., Ltd., 
Hangzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Background: Paternal uniparental disomy (UPD) of chromosome 7 is extremely rare, 
and only a few postnatal cases have been reported. The effects on growth were 
discordant in these cases, and the relevance of paternal UPD(7) to growth caused 
by imprinting remains questionable. Case presentation: Here, we report a 
prenatal case that underwent invasive prenatal diagnosis due to the high risk of 
Down's syndrome and failed noninvasive prenatal screening. The fetus had a 
normal karyotype and no apparent copy number variation. Homozygous copy-neutral 
regions on chromosome 7 were identified using a single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) array; the data for the parent-child trios showed that the fetus carried 
the whole paternal isodisomy of chromosome 7. Whole exome and Sanger sequencing 
revealed a homozygous frameshift mutation in SUGCT at 7p14.1, from the 
heterozygous carrier father, with no contribution from the mother. The parents 
decided to continue with the pregnancy after genetic counseling, and the neonate 
had normal physical findings at birth and showed overweight after birth during a 
long-term intensive follow-up. Conclusion: We report the first prenatal case who 
carried paternal UPD(7) and homozygous SUGCT mutation with an overweight 
phenotype after birth. The overweight may be caused by paternal UPD(7) or 
homozygous frameshift mutation of SUGCT, or both of them, but it is unclear 
which contributes more.

Copyright Â© 2023 Bu, Li, Peng, Li, Zhou, Zhu, He and Linpeng.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1272028
PMCID: PMC10619901
PMID: 37920852

Conflict of interest statement: Author ZZ was employed by the company Zhejiang 
Biosan Biochemical Technologies Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the 
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.