1. RSC Chem Biol. 2023 Aug 21;4(11):926-941. doi: 10.1039/d3cb00127j. eCollection
 2023 Nov 1.

The catechol moiety of obafluorin is essential for antibacterial activity.

Batey SFD(1), Davie MJ(1), Hems ES(1), Liston JD(1), Scott TA(1), Alt S(1), 
Francklyn CS(2), Wilkinson B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, John Innes Centre Norwich Research Park 
Norwich NR4 7UH UK barrie.wilkinson@jic.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Vermont, 
Burlington Vermont 05405 USA christopher.francklyn@med.uvm.edu.

Obafluorin is a Pseudomonas fluorescens antibacterial natural product that 
inhibits threonyl-tRNA synthetase (ThrRS). It acts as a broad-spectrum 
antibiotic against a range of clinically relevant pathogens and comprises a 
strained β-lactone ring decorated with catechol and 4-nitro-benzyl moieties. The 
catechol moiety is widespread in nature and its role in the coordination of 
ferric iron has been well-characterised in siderophores and Trojan horse 
antibiotics. Here we use a combination of mutasynthesis, bioassays, enzyme 
assays and metal binding studies to delineate the role of the catechol moiety in 
the bioactivity of obafluorin. We use P. fluorescens biosynthetic mutants to 
generate obafluorin analogues with modified catechol moieties. We demonstrate 
that an intact catechol is required for both antibacterial activity and 
inhibition of the ThrRS molecular target. Although recent work showed that the 
obafluorin catechol coordinates Zn2+ in the ThrRS active site, we find that 
obafluorin is a weak Zn2+ binder in vitro, contrasting with a strong, specific 
1 : 1 interaction with Fe3+. We use bioassays with siderophore transporter 
mutants to probe the role of the obafluorin catechol in Fe3+-mediated uptake. 
Surprisingly, obafluorin does not behave as a Trojan horse antibiotic but 
instead exhibits increased antibacterial activity in the presence of Fe3+. We 
further demonstrate that Fe3+ binding prevents the hydrolytic breakdown of the 
β-lactone ring, revealing a hitherto unreported function for the catechol moiety 
in natural product bioactivity.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d3cb00127j
PMCID: PMC10619133
PMID: 37920400

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.