1. Semin Musculoskelet Radiol. 2023 Dec;27(6):661-675. doi:
10.1055/s-0043-1775745.  Epub 2023 Nov 7.

Up-and-coming Radiotracers for Imaging Pain Generators.

van der Heijden RA(1), Biswal S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus University Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin.

Chronic musculoskeletal pain is among the most highly prevalent diseases 
worldwide. Managing patients with chronic pain remains very challenging because 
current imaging techniques focus on morphological causes of pain that can be 
inaccurate and misleading. Moving away from anatomical constructs of disease, 
molecular imaging has emerged as a method to identify diseases according to 
their molecular, physiologic, or cellular signatures that can be applied to the 
variety of biomolecular changes that occur in nociception and pain processing 
and therefore have tremendous potential for precisely pinpointing the source of 
a patient's pain. Several molecular imaging approaches to image the painful 
process are now available, including imaging of voltage-gated sodium channels, 
calcium channels, hypermetabolic processes, the substance P receptor, the 
sigma-1 receptor, and imaging of macrophage trafficking. This article provides 
an overview of promising molecular imaging approaches for the imaging of 
musculoskeletal pain with a focus on preclinical methods.

The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonDerivative-NonCommercial License, 
permitting copying and reproduction so long as the original work is given 
appropriate credit. Contents may not be used for commercial purposes, or 
adapted, remixed, transformed or built upon. 
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-1775745
PMCID: PMC10629993
PMID: 37935213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.