1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Dec 11;51(22):12054-12068. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad950.

GenoPipe: identifying the genotype of origin within (epi)genomic datasets.

Lang OW(1), Srivastava D(2), Pugh BF(1), Lai WKM(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, 
NY 14853, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA, 16801, USA.
(3)Department of Computational Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850, 
USA.
(4)Cornell Institute of Biotechnology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850, 
USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Mar 15:2023.03.14.532660. doi: 10.1101/2023.03.14.532660.

Confidence in experimental results is critical for discovery. As the scale of 
data generation in genomics has grown exponentially, experimental error has 
likely kept pace despite the best efforts of many laboratories. Technical 
mistakes can and do occur at nearly every stage of a genomics assay (i.e. cell 
line contamination, reagent swapping, tube mislabelling, etc.) and are often 
difficult to identify post-execution. However, the DNA sequenced in genomic 
experiments contains certain markers (e.g. indels) encoded within and can often 
be ascertained forensically from experimental datasets. We developed the 
Genotype validation Pipeline (GenoPipe), a suite of heuristic tools that operate 
together directly on raw and aligned sequencing data from individual 
high-throughput sequencing experiments to characterize the underlying genome of 
the source material. We demonstrate how GenoPipe validates and rescues 
erroneously annotated experiments by identifying unique markers inherent to an 
organism's genome (i.e. epitope insertions, gene deletions and SNPs).

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkad950
PMCID: PMC10711449
PMID: 37933851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]