1. J Clin Med. 2023 Oct 30;12(21):6856. doi: 10.3390/jcm12216856.

Clinical Factors for Predicting Pharmacotherapy in Twin Pregnancies Complicated 
by Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.

Catic A(1), Reischer T(1)(2), Heinzl F(1), GÃ¶bl C(1), Yerlikaya-Schatten G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Feto-Maternal Medicine, 
Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Fetal Medicine Unit, Liverpool Women's Hospital, Liverpool L8 7SS, UK.

Controlling blood glucose levels is the main target in pregnant women with 
gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). Twin pregnancies are offered the same 
screening selection and have the same diagnostic criteria as well as treatment 
of gestational diabetes as singleton pregnancies, even though the risks for 
pregnancy complications are increased. The aim of this study was to assess the 
association between predicting factors, OGTT glucose levels and pharmacotherapy 
requirements in twin pregnancies with GDM. This retrospective cohort study 
included 446 GDM patients with twin pregnancies (246 managed with lifestyle 
modifications and 200 requiring pharmacotherapy) over a time period of 18 years. 
An evaluation of maternal characteristics and a standardized 75 g oral glucose 
test (OGGT) for glucose concentrations at fasting, 1 h and 2 h were conduced. 
OGTT glucose levels at fasting (=0 min, p < 0.01) and 1 h (p < 0.01) were 
significantly associated with the later requirement of pharmacotherapy. Also, 
clinical risk factors (pre-pregnancy BMI p < 0.01, multiparity p < 0.05, GDM in 
previous pregnancy p < 0.01, assisted reproduction p < 0.05) showed a predictive 
accuracy for insulin therapy in twin pregnancies complicated by GDM, whereas age 
and chorionicity had no effect. OGTT glucose measures in addition to clinical 
risk factors are promising variables for risk stratification in mothers with GDM 
and twin pregnancy.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12216856
PMCID: PMC10649756
PMID: 37959321

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.