1. Nat Commun. 2023 Nov 13;14(1):7323. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-43098-1.

Intra- and inter-molecular regulation by intrinsically-disordered regions 
governs PUF protein RNA binding.

Qiu C(1), Zhang Z(2), Wine RN(1), Campbell ZT(3), Zhang J(2), Hall TMT(4).

Author information:
(1)Epigenetics and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle 
Park, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
USA.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(4)Epigenetics and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle 
Park, NC, USA. hall4@niehs.nih.gov.

PUF proteins are characterized by globular RNA-binding domains. They also 
interact with partner proteins that modulate their RNA-binding activities. 
Caenorhabditis elegans PUF protein fem-3 binding factor-2 (FBF-2) partners with 
intrinsically disordered Lateral Signaling Target-1 (LST-1) to regulate target 
mRNAs in germline stem cells. Here, we report that an intrinsically disordered 
region (IDR) at the C-terminus of FBF-2 autoinhibits its RNA-binding affinity by 
increasing the off rate for RNA binding. Moreover, the FBF-2 C-terminal region 
interacts with its globular RNA-binding domain at the same site where LST-1 
binds. This intramolecular interaction restrains an electronegative cluster of 
amino acid residues near the 5' end of the bound RNA to inhibit RNA binding. 
LST-1 binding in place of the FBF-2 C-terminus therefore releases autoinhibition 
and increases RNA-binding affinity. This regulatory mechanism, driven by IDRs, 
provides a biochemical and biophysical explanation for the interdependence of 
FBF-2 and LST-1 in germline stem cell self-renewal.

Â© 2023. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-43098-1
PMCID: PMC10641069
PMID: 37953271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.