1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Oct 24:2023.10.23.563661. doi: 
10.1101/2023.10.23.563661.

Learning gene networks under SNP perturbation using SNP and allele-specific 
expression data.

Yoon JH(1), Kim S(1).

Author information:
(1)Computational Biology Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 
15213, United States of America.

Allele-specific expression quantification from RNA-seq reads provides 
opportunities to study the control of gene regulatory networks by cis-acting and 
trans-acting genetic variants. Many existing methods performed a single-gene and 
single-SNP association analysis to identify expression quantitative trait loci 
(eQTLs), and placed the eQTLs against known gene networks for functional 
interpretation. Instead, we view eQTL data as a capture of the effects of 
perturbation of gene regulatory system by a large number of genetic variants and 
reconstruct a gene network perturbed by eQTLs. We introduce a statistical 
framework called CiTruss for simultaneously learning a gene network and 
cis-acting and trans-acting eQTLs that perturb this network, given population 
allele-specific expression and SNP data. CiTruss uses a multi-level conditional 
Gaussian graphical model to model trans-acting eQTLs perturbing the expression 
of both alleles in gene network at the top level and cis-acting eQTLs perturbing 
the expression of each allele at the bottom level. We derive a transformation of 
this model that allows efficient learning for large-scale human data. Our 
analysis of the GTEx and LGÃ—SM advanced intercross line mouse data for multiple 
tissue types with CiTruss provides new insights into genetics of gene 
regulation. CiTruss revealed that gene networks consist of local subnetworks 
over proximally located genes and global subnetworks over genes scattered across 
genome, and that several aspects of gene regulation by eQTLs such as the impact 
of genetic diversity, pleiotropy, tissue-specific gene regulation, and local and 
long-range linkage disequilibrium among eQTLs can be explained through these 
local and global subnetworks.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.10.23.563661
PMCID: PMC10634764
PMID: 37961468