1. Poult Sci. 2024 Jan;103(1):103208. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2023.103208. Epub 2023
Oct  17.

Genome-wide association study for body weight and feed consumption traits in 
Japanese quail using Bayesian approaches.

Alboali H(1), Moradi MH(2), Khaltabadi Farahani AH(1), Mohammadi H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture and Environment, Arak 
University, 38156-8-8349 Arak, Iran.
(2)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture and Environment, Arak 
University, 38156-8-8349 Arak, Iran. Electronic address: Hoseinmoradi@ut.ac.ir.

The aim of this study was to perform a genome-wide association study (GWAS) 
based on Bayes A and Bayes B statistical methods to identify genomic loci and 
candidate genes associated with body weight gain, feed intake, and feed 
conversion ratio in Japanese quail. For this purpose, genomic data obtained from 
Illumina iSelect 4K quail SNP chip were utilized. After implementing various 
quality control steps, genotype data from a total of 875 birds for 2,015 SNP 
markers were used for subsequent analyses. The Bayesian analyses were performed 
using hibayes package in R (version 4.3.1) and Gibbs sampling algorithm. The 
results of the analyses showed that Bayes A accounted for 11.43, 11.65, and 
11.39% of the phenotypic variance for body weight gain, feed intake, and feed 
conversion ratio, respectively, while the variance explained by Bayes B was 
7.02, 8.61, and 6.48%, respectively. Therefore, in the current study, results 
obtained from Bayes A were used for further analyses. In order to perform the 
gene enrichment analysis and to identify the functional pathways and classes of 
genes that are over-represented in a large set of genes associated with each 
trait, all markers that accounted for more than 0.1% of the phenotypic variance 
for each trait were used. The results of this analysis revealed a total of 23, 
38, and 14 SNP markers associated with body weight gain, feed intake, and feed 
conversion ratio in Japanese quail, respectively. The results of the gene 
enrichment analysis led to the identification of biological pathways (and 
candidate genes) related to lipid phosphorylation (TTC7A gene) and cell junction 
(FGFR4 and FLRT2 genes) associated with body weight gain, calcium signaling 
pathway (ADCY2 and CAMK1D genes) associated with feed intake, and glycerolipid 
metabolic process (LIPC gene), lipid metabolic process (ADGRF5 and ESR1 genes), 
and glutathione transferase (GSTK1 gene) associated with feed conversion ratio. 
Overall, the findings of this study can provide valuable insights into the 
genetic architecture of growth and feed consumption traits in Japanese quail.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2023.103208
PMCID: PMC10663954
PMID: 37980758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]