1. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2023 Nov 20;26(11):801-812. doi: 
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2023.102.43. Epub 2023 Nov 21.

[Chinese Expert Consensus on the Clinical Practice of Non-small Cell Lung Cancer 
 Fusion Gene Detection Based on RNA-based NGS].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Society of Cancer Precision Medicine of Chinese Anti-Cancer Association; China 
Primary Health Care Foundation Tumor Precision Diagnosis and Treatment 
Committee; Chinese Anti-Cancer Association, Lung Cancer Study Group of Committee 
of Oncopathology.

RNA-based next-generation sequencing (NGS) has been recommended as a method for 
detecting fusion genes in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) according to 
clinical practice guidelines and expert consensus. The primary targetable 
alterations in NSCLC consist of gene mutations and fusions, making the detection 
of gene mutations and fusions indispensable for assessing the feasibility of 
targeted therapies. Currently, the integration of DNA-based NGS and RNA-based 
NGS allows for simultaneous detection of gene mutations and fusions and has been 
partially implemented in clinical practice. However, standardized guidelines and 
criteria for the significance, application scenarios, and quality control of 
RNA-based NGS in fusion gene detection are still lacking in China. This 
consensus aims to provide further clarity on the practical significance, 
application scenarios, and quality control measures of RNA-based NGS in fusion 
gene detection. Additionally, it offers guiding recommendations to facilitate 
the clinical implementation of RNA-based NGS in the diagnosis and treatment of 
NSCLC, ultimately maximizing the benefits for patients from fusion gene 
detection. .

Publisher: 【中文题目：基于RNA-based NGS检测非小细胞肺癌 融合基因临床实践中国专家共识】 
【中文摘要：基于RNA水平的二代测序（RNA-based next-generation sequencing, RNA-based 
NGS）技术已被非小细胞肺癌（non‑small cell lung cancer, 
NSCLC）临床实践指南和专家共识推荐为融合基因的检测方法之一。NSCLC可用药靶点主要包括基因突变和融合，用于评估靶向治疗可行性的基因突变和融合基因检测均不可或缺。目前，基于DNA水平的NGS（DNA-based 
NGS）结合RNA-based NGS一次性同步检测基因突变和融合的技术已部分应用于临床实践。然而，RNA-based 
NGS检测融合基因的应用时机、应用场景和质控方面在我国仍缺乏规范和标准。本共识将进一步明确RNA-based 
NGS在融合基因检测中的应用时机、应用场景和质控，并给予指导性建议，推动RNA-based 
NGS在NSCLC临床诊疗中的应用，使患者能够最大程度地从融合基因检测中获益。 】 【中文关键词：非小细胞肺癌；融合基因；RNA-based 
NGS；靶向治疗；专家共识】.

DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2023.102.43
PMCID: PMC10714047
PMID: 37985137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]