1. Cells. 2023 Nov 15;12(22):2630. doi: 10.3390/cells12222630.

SIRT1 Prevents R-Loops during Chronological Aging by Modulating DNA Replication 
at rDNA Loci.

Thakur BL(1), Kusi NA(1), Mosavarpour S(1), Zhu R(1), Redon CE(1), Fu H(1), 
Dhall A(1), Pongor LS(1), Sebastian R(1), Indig FE(2), Aladjem MI(1).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National 
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Confocal Imaging Facility, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

In metazoans, the largest sirtuin, SIRT1, is a nuclear protein implicated in 
epigenetic modifications, circadian signaling, DNA recombination, replication, 
and repair. Our previous studies have demonstrated that SIRT1 binds replication 
origins and inhibits replication initiation from a group of potential initiation 
sites (dormant origins). We studied the effects of aging and SIRT1 activity on 
replication origin usage and the incidence of transcription-replication 
collisions (creating R-loop structures) in adult human cells obtained at 
different time points during chronological aging and in cancer cells. In 
primary, untransformed cells, SIRT1 activity declined and the prevalence of 
R-loops rose with chronological aging. Both the reduction in SIRT1 activity and 
the increased abundance of R-loops were also observed during the passage of 
primary cells in culture. All cells, regardless of donor age or transformation 
status, reacted to the short-term, acute chemical inhibition of SIRT1 with the 
activation of excessive replication initiation events coincident with an 
increased prevalence of R-loops. However, cancer cells activated dormant 
replication origins, genome-wide, during long-term proliferation with mutated or 
depleted SIRT1, whereas, in primary cells, the aging-associated SIRT1-mediated 
activation of dormant origins was restricted to rDNA loci. These observations 
suggest that chronological aging and the associated decline in SIRT1 activity 
relax the regulatory networks that protect cells against excess replication and 
that the mechanisms protecting from replication-transcription collisions at the 
rDNA loci manifest as differentially enhanced sensitivities to SIRT1 decline and 
chronological aging.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12222630
PMCID: PMC10669956
PMID: 37998365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.