1. J Am Psychiatr Nurses Assoc. 2024 Nov-Dec;30(6):940-952. doi: 
10.1177/10783903231212908. Epub 2023 Nov 23.

Identification of Relationships Among Resilience Factors Using Network Analysis: 
A Pilot Study.

Niitsu K(1), Lee C(2), Rice MJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Kosuke Niitsu, PhD, ARNP, PMHNP-BC, University of Washington Bothell, 
Bothell, WA, USA.
(2)Chiyoung Lee, PhD, RN, University of Washington Bothell, Bothell, WA, USA.
(3)Michael J. Rice, PhD, APN, FAAN, WAN, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical 
Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although college life can be fulfilling, it can be stressful, 
particularly for health professional students. In addition, they may have had 
Adverse Childhood Experience (ACE) that increases their sensitivity to academic 
stress. Yet, students need to overcome challenges to become successful 
professionals. The literature suggests the following factors may be associated 
with resilience: ACE and academic stress as the antecedents; ego-resilience, 
emotion regulation, resources, social support, inflammatory markers, and genes 
as the defining attributes; and mental health and sense of coherence (SOC) as 
the consequences.
AIMS: The purpose is to identify the relationships among factors associated with 
resilience using network analysis.
METHODS: A total of 70 college students participated in this cross-sectional 
pilot study. They completed measures of psychosocial variables and provided 
saliva samples, which were analyzed for Serotonin Transporter-Linked Promoter 
Region (5-HTTLPR)/rs25531 and inflammatory markers. Mixed graphical models 
including all variables were estimated using the R-package mgm.
RESULTS: Network analysis revealed positive associations between (1) mental 
health and SOC; (2) mental health and resources; (3) mental health and social 
support; (4) SOC and reappraisal of emotion regulation; (5) resources and 
reappraisal of emotion regulation; and (6) resources and social support. In 
addition, SOC and academic stress were negatively associated. Furthermore, the 
short variant of 5-HTTLPR/rs25531 was associated with stronger suppression of 
emotion regulation and fewer resources compared with the long variant.
CONCLUSION: Resilience may be influenced by biopsychosocial factors, notably SOC 
and 5-HTTLPR/rs25531. However, longitudinal research is needed with a larger 
sample size to better understand how these and other factors may affect 
resilience.

DOI: 10.1177/10783903231212908
PMID: 37997362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe authors 
declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: K.N., C.L., and M.J.R. 
declare no conflicts of interest with the research or writing of this paper.