1. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2023 Nov;28(6):1013-1025. doi: 
10.1007/s12192-023-01395-0. Epub 2023 Nov 25.

Recombinant cellular model system for human muscle-type nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor α1(2)β1δε.

Brockmöller S(1), Seeger T(2), Worek F(2), Rothmiller S(2).

Author information:
(1)Bundeswehr Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Munich, Germany. 
Sabrina.Brockmoeller@yahoo.de.
(2)Bundeswehr Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Munich, Germany.

The human muscle-type nicotinic acetylcholine receptor α12β1δε (nAChR) is a 
complex transmembrane receptor needed for drug screening for disorders like 
congenital myasthenic syndromes and multiple pterygium syndrome. Until today, 
most models are still using the nAChR from Torpedo californica electric ray. A 
simple reproducible cellular system expressing functional human muscle-type 
nAChR is still missing. This study addressed this issue and further tested the 
hypothesis that different chaperones, both biological and chemical, and 
posttranslational modification supporting substances as well as hypothermic 
incubation are able to increase the nAChR yield. Therefore, Gibson cloning was 
used to generate transfer plasmids carrying the sequence of nAChR or chosen 
biological chaperones to support the nAChR folding in the cellular host. Viral 
transduction was used for stable integration of these transgenes in Chinese 
hamster ovary cells (CHO). Proteins were detected with Western blot, in-cell and 
on-cell Western, and the function of the receptor with voltage clamp analysis. 
We show that the internalization of nAChR into plasma membranes was sufficient 
for detection and function. Additional transgenic overexpression of biological 
chaperones did result in a reduced nAChR expression. Chemical chaperones, 
posttranslational modification supporting substances, and hypothermic conditions 
are well-suited supporting applications to increase the protein levels of 
different subunits. This study presents a stable and functional cell line that 
expresses human muscle-type nAChR and yields can be further increased using the 
chemical chaperone nicotine without affecting cell viability. The simplified 
access to this model system should enable numerous applications beyond drug 
development. Graphical abstract created with http://biorender.com.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12192-023-01395-0
PMCID: PMC10746606
PMID: 38006565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.