1. Viruses. 2023 Nov 14;15(11):2253. doi: 10.3390/v15112253.

Comparative Analysis of Alpha and Beta HPV E6 Oncoproteins: Insights into 
Functional Distinctions and Divergent Mechanisms of Pathogenesis.

Skelin J(1), Tomaić V(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Ruđer Bošković Institute, Bijenička 54, 10000 
Zagreb, Croatia.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) represent a diverse group of DNA viruses that 
infect epithelial cells of mucosal and cutaneous tissues, leading to a wide 
spectrum of clinical outcomes. Among various HPVs, alpha (α) and beta (β) types 
have garnered significant attention due to their associations with human health. 
α-HPVs are primarily linked to infections of the mucosa, with high-risk 
subtypes, such as HPV16 and HPV18, being the major etiological agents of 
cervical and oropharyngeal cancers. In contrast, β-HPVs are predominantly 
associated with cutaneous infections and are commonly found on healthy skin. 
However, certain β-types, notably HPV5 and HPV8, have been implicated in the 
development of non-melanoma skin cancers in immunocompromised individuals, 
highlighting their potential role in pathogenicity. In this review, we 
comprehensively analyze the similarities and differences between α- and β-HPV E6 
oncoproteins, one of the major drivers of viral replication and cellular 
transformation, and how these impact viral fitness and the capacity to induce 
malignancy. In particular, we compare the mechanisms these oncoproteins use to 
modulate common cellular processes-apoptosis, DNA damage repair, cell 
differentiation, and the immune response-further shedding light on their shared 
and distinct features, which enable them to replicate at divergent locations of 
the human body and cause different types of cancer.

DOI: 10.3390/v15112253
PMCID: PMC10674601
PMID: 38005929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.