1. Biomedicines. 2023 Nov 7;11(11):2987. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11112987.

Exploiting TLK1 and Cisplatin Synergy for Synthetic Lethality in 
Androgen-Insensitive Prostate Cancer.

Bhoir S(1), Ogundepo O(1), Yu X(1), Shi R(2), De Benedetti A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, LSU Health Shreveport, 1501 
Kings Hwy, Shreveport, LA 71103, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, LSU Health Shreveport, 1501 Kings Hwy, Shreveport, LA 
71103, USA.

Cellular organisms possess intricate DNA damage repair and tolerance pathways to 
manage various DNA lesions arising from endogenous or exogenous sources. The 
dysregulation of these pathways is associated with cancer development and 
progression. Synthetic lethality (SL), a promising cancer therapy concept, 
involves exploiting the simultaneous functional loss of two genes for selective 
cell death. PARP inhibitors (PARPis) have demonstrated success in BRCA-deficient 
tumors. Cisplatin (CPT), a widely used chemotherapy agent, forms DNA adducts and 
crosslinks, rendering it effective against various cancers, but less so for 
prostate cancer (PCa) due to resistance and toxicity. Here, we explore the 
therapeutic potential of TLK1, a kinase upregulated in androgen-insensitive PCa 
cells, as a target for enhancing CPT-based therapy. TLK1 phosphorylates key 
homologous recombination repair (HRR) proteins, RAD54L and RAD54B, which are 
critical for HRR alongside RAD51. The combination of CPT with TLK1 inhibitor J54 
exhibits SL in androgen-insensitive PCa cells. The formation of double-strand 
break intermediates during inter-strand crosslink processing necessitates HRR 
for effective repair. Therefore, targeting TLK1 with J54 enhances the SL of CPT 
by impeding HRR, leading to increased sensitivity in PCa cells. These findings 
suggest a promising approach for improving CPT-based therapies in PCa, 
particularly in androgen-insensitive cases. By elucidating the role of TLK1 in 
CPT resistance, this study provides valuable insights into potential therapeutic 
targets to overcome PCa resistance to CPT chemotherapy. Further investigations 
into TLK1 inhibition in combination with other DNA-damaging agents may pave the 
way for more effective and targeted treatments for PCa and other cancers that 
exhibit resistance to traditional chemotherapy agents.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11112987
PMCID: PMC10669050
PMID: 38001987

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.