1. J Gen Virol. 2023 Nov;104(11):001923. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.001923.

Actin cytoskeleton remodeling disrupts physical barriers to infection and 
presents entry receptors to respiratory syncytial virus.

Kieser QJ(1), Granoski MJ(1), McClelland RD(1), Griffiths C(2), Bilawchuk LM(1), 
Stojic A(1), Elawar F(1), Jamieson K(3), Proud D(3), Marchant DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, T6G-2E1, Canada.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, VA 22908,, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Snyder Institute for Chronic 
Diseases, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta 
T2N 4Z6, Canada.

RSV is the leading cause of infant hospitalizations and a significant cause of 
paediatric and geriatric morbidity worldwide. Recently, we reported that 
insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) was a receptor for respiratory 
syncytial virus (RSV) in airway epithelial cells and that activation of IGF1R 
recruited the coreceptor, nucleolin (NCL), to the cell surface. Cilia and mucus 
that line the airways pose a significant barrier to viral and bacterial 
infection. The cortical actin cytoskeleton has been shown by others to mediate 
RSV entry, so we studied the roles of the RSV receptors and actin remodelling 
during virus entry. We found that IGF1R expression and phosphorylation were 
associated with the ability of RSV to infect cells. Confocal immunofluorescence 
imaging showed that actin projections, a hallmark of macropinocytosis, formed 
around viral particles 30 min after infection. Consistent with prior reports we 
also found that virus particles were internalized into early endosome antigen-1 
positive endosomes within 90 min. Inhibiting actin polymerization significantly 
reduced viral titre by approximately ten-fold. Inhibiting PI3 kinase and PKCζ in 
stratified air-liquid interface (ALI) models of the airway epithelium had 
similar effects on reducing the actin remodelling observed during infection and 
attenuating viral entry. Actin projections were associated with NCL interacting 
with RSV particles resting on apical cilia of the ALIs. We conclude that 
macropinocytosis-like actin projections protrude through normally protective 
cilia and mucus layers of stratified airway epithelium that helps present the 
IGF1R receptor and the NCL coreceptor to RSV particles waiting at the surface.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.001923
PMCID: PMC10768689
PMID: 38015055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts to declare.