1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2023 Nov 1;24(11):3739-3748. doi: 
10.31557/APJCP.2023.24.11.3739.

Regulation of NF-κB Expression by Thymoquinone; A Role in Regulating 
Pro-Inflammatory Cytokines and Programmed Cell Death in Hepatic Cancer Cells.

Salah A(1), Sleem R(1), Abd-Elaziz A(1), Khalil H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
Research Institute, University of Sadat City, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: The miracle herb Nigella sativa (N. sativa) is a member of the 
Ranunculaceae family that possesses many properties, such as antioxidant, 
anticancer, analgesic, antibacterial, and anti-inflammatory. Thymoquinone (TQ) 
is the primary ingredient that makes up N. sativa, which is responsible for its 
many properties. So, our research focused on the biological role of TQ and its 
anticancer activities.
METHODS: A wide range of TQ concentrations (50µg/µl, 25µg/ µl, and 12.5µg µl) 
was prepared and evaluated for their potential regulatory role in cell lines of 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2 cell line) compared with normal hepatocytes 
cells, untreated and DMSO-treated cells.
RESULTS: The more significant level of LDH obtained after TQ treatment compared 
to untreated cells provides evidence of the cytotoxic effects of TQ on HepG2 
cells. Notably, the normal hepatocyte cells subjected to the same concentrations 
of TQ showed neglected influence in cell viability rate, indicating the 
selective regulatory role of TQ in cancer cell proliferation. Interestingly, as 
a critical mediator of malignancy transformation, the nuclear factor-kappa B 
expression level (NF-κB) significantly decreased in a time and dose-dependent 
manner of TQ treatment. Furthermore, we investigated whether TQ regulates the 
expression of deleted liver cancer 1 (DLC1) and Caspase 3 (Casp3). Notably, the 
treatment with TQ showed increased expression levels of DLC1 and Casp3 upon 
treatment. TQ extract sufficiently mediated the secretion of the released 
pro-inflammatory cytokines from treated cells. This regulation of released 
cytokines by TQ may affect the activation of NF-κB in treated cells.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that TQ mediates the activation of Casp3, 
DLC1, and NF-κB, providing a new function of TQ in treating hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC).

DOI: 10.31557/APJCP.2023.24.11.3739
PMCID: PMC10772774
PMID: 38019231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.