1. Front Chem. 2023 Nov 13;11:1213507. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2023.1213507.
eCollection  2023.

Graphene quantum dots promote migration and differentiation of periodontal 
ligament stem cells.

Liang Y(1), Gao W(1), Deng S(1), Wu D(1), Jiang Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Qiu R(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Disease Treatment, 
Guangxi Health Commission Key Laboratory of Prevention and Treatment for Oral 
Infectious Diseases, Guangxi Key Laboratory of Oral and Maxillofacial 
Rehabilitation and Reconstruction, Guangxi Clinical Research Center for 
Craniofacial Deformity, College of Stomatology, Hospital of Stomatology, Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, China.

Graphene and its derivatives have attracted much attention as nanomaterials in 
bone tissue engineering because of their remarkable ability to induce cell 
osteogenic differentiation. However, graphene quantum dots (GQDs), as graphene 
derivatives, little is known about their osteodifferentiation- and 
osteoinduction-promoting capabilities, especially in the restoration of bone 
defect caused by periodontitis. Therefore, there is a growing need to 
investigate the effect of GQDs on periodontal ligament stem cells (PDLSCs). 
Here, we postulated that GQDs are a promising biocompatible nanomaterial that 
facilitated the migration and differentiation of PDLSCs, and use laboratory 
methods like CCK-8, transwell experiments, qRT-PCR, Alizarin red staining and 
immunofluorescence staining to evaluate. Our experiments confirmed that GQDs did 
not inhibit cell viability, with most cells remaining viable even at GQDs 
concentrations of up to 30 μg mL-1. Moreover, GQDs were found to significantly 
enhance PDLSC migration, with the peak effect observed at concentrations of 5 
and 10 μg mL-1. Furthermore, GQDs accelerated osteoblastic differentiation in 
PDLSCs and induced the mineralization of calcium nodules. Additionally, GQDs 
were shown to promote fibroblast differentiation in PDLSCs compared to the 
control group. Thus, GQDs not only possessed low cytotoxicity and good 
biocompatibility, but also displayed the beneficial capability to migration and 
differentiation of PDLSCs, which indicated GQDs might be a potential 
nanomaterial for bone regeneration.

Copyright © 2023 Liang, Gao, Deng, Wu, Jiang, Zhang and Qiu.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2023.1213507
PMCID: PMC10679356
PMID: 38025053

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.