1. SAGE Open Med Case Rep. 2023 Nov 7;11:2050313X231211047. doi: 
10.1177/2050313X231211047. eCollection 2023.

Diagnostic dilemmas and challenges in the management of myasthenia in infants 
and toddlers: A case report.

Mukhtiar K(1), Raza M(1), Tejani I(2), Ali F(1), Ibrahim S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics & Child Health, Section of Pediatric Neurology, Aga 
Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan.

Myasthenia in the infancy and toddler age group is rare and often presents a 
challenge to treating pediatric neurologists. Our report addresses the 
challenges encountered when distinguishing myasthenia in infants and toddlers 
from similar illnesses, as well as the differentiation between congenital 
myasthenia, transient myasthenia, and autoimmune myasthenia. We present four 
cases of myasthenia between the ages of 10 and 30 months. The diagnosis and 
management of these cases were challenging due to the variability in clinical 
presentation. Four cases of myasthenia were diagnosed, with three having 
autoimmune myasthenia and one having congenital myasthenic syndrome. One patient 
initially tested negative for acetylcholine receptor antibodies, but later 
tested positive after 4 months and had a rare facial diplegia finding. The 
patient with congenital myasthenic syndrome had a novel genetic mutation, DPAGT1 
homozygous variants, and also had false positive acetylcholine receptor 
antibodies. These cases highlight the importance of genetic testing for all 
infants and toddlers suspected of having myasthenia.

Â© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1177/2050313X231211047
PMCID: PMC10631333
PMID: 38022851

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.