1. Vet Med (Praha). 2023 Oct 23;68(10):392-402. doi: 10.17221/54/2023-VETMED. 
eCollection 2023 Oct.

Lactobacillus sp. participated in the adaptation of Rongchang piglets to cold 
stress.

Chai J(1)(2), Long X(1)(2), Wu P(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Wu X(1)(2), Tu Z(1)(2), 
Wei M(1)(2), Guo Z(1)(2), Zhang T(1)(2), Chen L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Chongqing Academy of Animal Science, Chong Qing, Rongchang, P.R. China.
(2)National Center of Technology Innovation for Pigs, Chong Qing, Rongchang, 
P.R. China.

Rongchang piglets were easily induced to cold stress and diarrhoea in the winter 
when raised in an open hog house. However, they also gradually recovered under 
mid-cold stress. Other studies have suggested gut microbiome might be involved 
in the host energy metabolism to relieve stress. To study how to adapt Rongchang 
piglets to cold stress by gut microbiome, thirty Rongchang piglets were randomly 
divided into a mild cold stress group and a control group for 30 consecutive 
days. The findings revealed that the piglets had low growth performance and 
a high diarrhoea rate and mortality rate during the first half of the cold 
treatment, but subsequently stabilised. The level of cortisol (COR) also 
displayed a similar trend. In the mild cold stress group, the relative abundance 
of Muribaculaceae significantly increased on day 15, and the predominant 
bacterial on day 30 was Lactobacillus sp. Our results indicated that the 
Rongchang piglet's production performance and health were impaired at the start 
of the mild cold stress. However, as time passed, the body could progressively 
adapt to the low temperature, and Lactobacillus sp. participated in this 
process. This study provides new insight into how to alleviate health damage 
caused by cold stress.

Copyright: © 2023 Chai et al.

DOI: 10.17221/54/2023-VETMED
PMCID: PMC10666660
PMID: 38028206

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.