1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2024 Jan;11(4):e2305371. doi: 10.1002/advs.202305371. Epub
2023  Nov 30.

Human Motor System-Based Biohybrid Robot-On-a-Chip for Drug Evaluation of 
Neurodegenerative Disease.

Shin M(1), Ha T(1), Lim J(1), An J(1), Beak G(1), Choi JH(2), Melvin AA(1), Yoon 
J(3)(4), Choi JW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Sogang University, 35 
Baekbeom-ro, Mapo-gu, Seoul, 04107, Republic of Korea.
(2)School of Chemical Engineering, Jeonbuk National University, 567 
Baekje-daero, Deokjin-gu, Jeonju-si, Jeollabuk-do, 54896, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Biomedical-Chemical Engineering, The Catholic University of 
Korea, 43 Jibong-ro, Wonmi-gu, Bucheon-si, Gyeonggi-do, 14662, Republic of 
Korea.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, The Catholic University of Korea, 43 Jibong-ro, 
Wonmi-gu, Bucheon-si, Gyeonggi-do, 14662, Republic ofKorea.

Biohybrid robots have been developed for biomedical applications and industrial 
robotics. However, the biohybrid robots have limitations to be applied in 
neurodegenerative disease research due to the absence of a central nervous 
system. In addition, the organoids-on-a-chip has not yet been able to replicate 
the physiological function of muscle movement in the human motor system, which 
is essential for evaluating the accuracy of the drugs used for treating 
neurodegenerative diseases. Here, a human motor system-based biohybrid 
robot-on-a-chip composed of a brain organoid, multi-motor neuron spheroids, and 
muscle bundle on solid substrateis proposed to evaluate the drug effect on 
neurodegenerative diseases for the first time. The electrophysiological signals 
from the cerebral organoid induced the muscle bundle movement through motor 
neuron spheroids. To evaluate the drug effect on Parkinson's disease (PD), a 
patient-derived midbrain organoid is generated and incorporated into a biohybrid 
robot-on-a-chip. The drug effect on PD is successfully evaluated by measuring 
muscle bundle movement. The muscle bundle movement of PD patient-derived 
midbrain organoid-based biohybrid robot-on-a-chip is increased from 4.5 ± 
0.99 µm to 18.67 ± 2.25 µm in response to levodopa. The proposed human motor 
system-based biohybrid robot-on-a-chip can serve as a standard biohybrid robot 
model for drug evaluation.

© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202305371
PMCID: PMC10811491
PMID: 38036423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.