1. J Biol Chem. 1987 Jan 15;262(2):841-7.

Heterologous desensitization of the inhibitory A1 adenosine receptor-adenylate 
cyclase system in rat adipocytes. Regulation of both Ns and Ni.

Parsons WJ, Stiles GL.

Adenosine, acting via A1 adenosine receptors, can inhibit adenylate cyclase 
activity in adipocytes. To assess the effects of chronic adenosine agonist 
exposure on the A1 adenosine receptor system of adipocytes, rats were infused 
with (-)-phenylisopropyladenosine or vehicle for 6 days and membranes were 
prepared. Basal as well as isoproterenol-, sodium fluoride-, and 
forskolin-stimulated adenylate cyclase activities were significantly increased 
(approximately 2-fold) in membranes from treated animals. 
(-)-Phenylisopropyladenosine-mediated inhibition of forskolin-stimulated 
adenylate cyclase activity was significantly (p = 0.0001) attenuated in 
membranes from treated rats (20.1 +/- 2.1% inhibition) versus controls (31.6 +/- 
2.3% inhibition). Prostaglandin E1-induced inhibition of forskolin-stimulated 
adenylate cyclase activity was also attenuated: 11.7 +/- 3.6 versus 23.2 +/- 
4.6% (p = 0.001). Using the A1 adenosine receptor agonist radioligand 
(-)-N6-(3-[125I]iodo-4-hydroxyphenylisopropyl)adenosine, 32% fewer high affinity 
binding sites were detected in membranes from treated animals (p less than 
0.04). Photoaffinity labeling with 
N6-2-(3-[125I]iodo-4-azidophenyl)ethyladenosine revealed no gross difference in 
receptor structure. The number of beta-adrenergic receptors as well as the 
percentage of receptors in the high affinity state as assessed by 
(-)-3-[125I]iodocyanopindolol binding were the same in both groups. In membranes 
from treated rats, the amount of [alpha-32P]NAD incorporated by pertussis toxin 
into the alpha subunit of the inhibitory guanine nucleotide regulatory protein 
(Ni) was decreased by 37 +/- 11%. Concurrently, the quantity of label 
incorporated by cholera toxin into the alpha subunit of the stimulatory guanine 
nucleotide regulatory protein (Ns) was increased by 44 +/- 14% in treated 
membranes. Finally, the capacity of Ns solubilized from treated membranes to 
stimulate adenylate cyclase activity when reconstituted into cyc- S49 lymphoma 
cell membranes was enhanced by approximately 50% compared to control. Thus, 
heterologous desensitization, manifested by a diminished capacity to inhibit 
adenylate cyclase and an enhanced responsiveness to stimulatory effectors, can 
be induced in the A1 adenosine receptor-adenylate cyclase system of adipocytes. 
A decrease in Ni alpha subunit concomitant with an increase in Ns alpha subunit 
quantity and activity may represent the biochemical mechanism of desensitization 
in this system.

PMID: 3805010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]