1. iScience. 2023 Nov 7;26(12):108409. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.108409.
eCollection  2023 Dec 15.

Kinin B1 receptor controls maternal adiponectin levels and influences offspring 
weight gain.

Alves-Silva T(1)(2), Húngaro TGR(3), Freitas-Lima LC(1), de Melo Arthur G(1), 
Arruda AC(3), Santos RB(3), Oyama LM(4), Mori MAS(5), Bader M(2)(6)(7)(8), 
Araujo RC(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Exercise Metabolism, Molecular Biology Program, 
Biophysics Department, Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo 
04039-032, Brazil.
(2)Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Campus Berlin-Buch, 13125 
Berlin, Germany.
(3)Laboratory of Genetics and Exercise Metabolism, Nephrology Program, 
Biophysics Department, Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo 
04039-032, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Nutrition and Endocrine Physiology, Physiology Department, 
Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo 04023-901, Brazil.
(5)Laboratory of Aging Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, 
Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), São Paulo 13083-862, 
Brazil.
(6)DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(7)Institute for Biology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(8)Charité University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Given the importance of the kinin B1 receptor in insulin and leptin hormonal 
regulation, which in turn is crucial in maternal adaptations to ensure nutrient 
supply to the fetus, we investigated the role of this receptor in maternal 
metabolism and fetoplacental development. Wild-type and kinin B1 
receptor-deficient (B1KO) female mice were mated with male mice of the opposite 
genotype. Consequently, the entire litter was heterozygous for kinin B1 
receptor, ensuring that there would be no influence of offspring genotype on the 
maternal phenotype. Maternal kinin B1 receptor blockade reduces adiponectin 
secretion by adipose tissue ex vivo, consistent with lower adiponectin levels in 
pregnant B1KO mice. Furthermore, fasting insulinemia also increased, which was 
associated with placental insulin resistance, reduced placental glycogen 
accumulation, and heavier offspring. Therefore, we propose the combination of 
chronic hyperinsulinemia and reduced adiponectin secretion in B1KO female mice 
create a maternal obesogenic environment that results in heavier pups.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.108409
PMCID: PMC10696114
PMID: 38058311

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.