1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1983 Dec;80(24):7586-90. doi:
10.1073/pnas.80.24.7586.

Expression of the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene in mammalian cells 
under the control of adenovirus type 12 promoters: effect of promoter 
methylation on gene expression.

Kruczek I, Doerfler W.

The effect of DNA methylation at specific promoter sites on gene expression was 
tested by using a sensitive and quantitative assay system. The plasmid pSVO CAT 
contains the prokaryotic gene chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) and a 
HindIII site in front of it for experimental promoter insertion. Upon insertion 
into pSVO CAT, the E1a and protein IX gene promoters from adenovirus type 12 
(Ad12) DNA were capable of mediating CAT expression upon transfection in mouse 
cells. In many viral and nonviral eukaryotic genes, DNA methylation at highly 
specific sites in the promoter region can attain a regulatory function in gene 
expression. One of the important sites is the 5' C-C-G-G 3' sequence. The 
CAT-promoting activity of the early simian virus 40 promoter in plasmid pSV2 CAT 
is refractory to methylation by the Hpa II or Hha I DNA methyltransferase at 5' 
C-C-G-G 3' or 5' G-C-G-C 3' sequences, respectively, because this promoter lacks 
such sites. The CAT coding sequence of this plasmid carries four Hpa II and no 
Hha I sites. Methylation of the Hpa II sites in the coding region does not 
affect expression. The E1a promoter of Ad12 DNA comprising the leftmost 525 base 
pairs of the viral genome carries two 5' C-C-G-G 3' and three 5' G-C-G-C 3' 
sites upstream from the leftmost "TATA" signal. Methylation of the Hpa II or Hha 
I sites incapacitates this promoter. The promoter of protein IX gene of Ad12 DNA 
contains one 5' C-C-G-G 3' and one 5' G-C-G-C 3' site downstream and two 5' 
G-C-G-C 3' sites greater than 300 base pairs upstream from the TATA motif and 
probably outside the promoter. The protein IX promoter is not inactivated by 
methylation of these sites. These data demonstrate that critical 5' methylations 
in the promoter region decrease or eliminate transcription; methylations of 
sites too far upstream or probably any sites downstream from the TATA site do 
not affect expression.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.80.24.7586
PMCID: PMC534385
PMID: 6324179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]