1. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Sep;15(9):5196-202. doi: 10.1128/MCB.15.9.5196.

Discrimination of DNA binding sites by mutant p53 proteins.

Thukral SK(1), Lu Y, Blain GC, Harvey TS, Jacobsen VL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Amgen, Thousand Oaks, California 91320, 
USA.

Critical determinants of DNA recognition by p53 have been identified by a 
molecular genetic approach. The wild-type human p53 fragment containing amino 
acids 71 to 330 (p53(71-330)) was used for in vitro DNA binding assays, and 
full-length human p53 was used for transactivation assays with Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. First, we defined the DNA binding specificity of the wild-type p53 
fragment by using systematically altered forms of a known consensus DNA site. 
This refinement indicates that p53 binds with high affinity to two repeats of 
PuGPuCA.TGPyCPy, a further refinement of an earlier defined consensus half site 
PuPuPuC(A/T).(T/A) GPyPyPy. These results were further confirmed by 
transactivation assays of yeast by using full-length human p53 and 
systematically altered DNA sites. Dimers of the pentamer AGGCA oriented either 
head-to-head or tail-to-tail bound efficiently, but transactivation was 
facilitated only through head-to-head dimers. To determine the origins of 
specificity in DNA binding by p53, we identified mutations that lead to altered 
specificities of DNA binding. Single-amino-acid substitutions were made at 
several positions within the DNA binding domain of p53, and this set of p53 
point mutants were tested with DNA site variants for DNA binding. DNA binding 
analyses showed that the mutants Lys-120 to Asn, Cys-277 to Gln or Arg, and 
Arg-283 to Gln bind to sites with noncanonical base pair changes at positions 2, 
3, and 1 in the pentamer (PuGPuCA), respectively. Thus, we implicate these 
residues in amino acid-base pair contacts. Interestingly, mutant Cys-277 to Gln 
bound a consensus site as two and four monomers, as opposed to the wild-type p53 
fragment, which invariably binds this site as four monomers.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.15.9.5196
PMCID: PMC230767
PMID: 7651437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]