1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Apr 14;270(15):8411-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.15.8411.

Mutations at Pro67 in the RecA protein P-loop motif differentially modify 
coprotease function and separate coprotease from recombination activities.

Konola JT(1), Nastri HG, Logan KM, Knight KL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Medical Center, Worcester 01655, USA.

The functional significance of residues in the RecA protein P-loop motif was 
assessed by analyzing 100 unique mutants with single amino acid substitutions in 
this region. Comparison of the effects on the LexA coprotease and recombination 
activities shows that Pro67 is unique among these residues because only at this 
position did we find substitutions that caused differential effects on these 
functions. One mutant, Pro67-->Trp, displays high constitutive coprotease 
activity and a moderate inhibitory effect on recombination functions. Glu and 
Asp substitutions result in low level constitutive coprotease activity but 
dramatically reduce recombination activity. The purified Pro67-->Trp protein 
shows a completely relaxed specificity for NTP cofactors in LexA cleavage assays 
and can use shorter length oligonucleotides as cofactors for cleavage of lambda 
cI repressor than can wild type RecA. Interestingly, both the mutant protein and 
wild type RecA can use very short oligonucleotides, e.g. (dA)6 and (dT)6, as 
cofactors for LexA cleavage. We have also found two mutations at position 67, 
which are completely defective for LexA coprotease activity in vivo but still 
maintain recombinational DNA repair (Pro67-->Lys) and homologous recombination 
(Pro67-->Lys and Pro67-->Arg) activities. These findings show that the 
recombination activities of RecA are mutationally separable from the coprotease 
function and that Pro67 is located in a functionally important position in the 
RecA structure.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.15.8411
PMID: 7721735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]