1. J Androl. 1994 Nov-Dec;15(6):521-7.

Significant role of 5 alpha-reductase on feedback effects of androgen in rat 
anterior pituitary cells demonstrated with a nonsteroidal 5 alpha-reductase 
inhibitor ONO-3805.

Nagamoto A(1), Noguchi K, Murai T, Kinoshita Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Yokohama City University, School of Medicine, Japan.

A 5 alpha-reductase inhibitor with nonsteroidal structure, ONO-3805, has been 
used to study the role of 5 alpha-reductase on positive and negative feedback 
effects of androgen on gonadotropin secretion in the rat anterior pituitary 
gland. Initially, the potential of ONO-3805 to inhibit the formation of 5 
alpha-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) was evaluated. The activity of 5 alpha-reductase 
in rat anterior pituitary gland was approximately one-fourth of that in rat 
prostate gland or epididymis, with a Michaelis' constant (Km) value for 
testosterone of 5-6 x 10(-7) M. When homogenates of rat anterior pituitary 
glands were incubated with 14C-testosterone (14C-T) in the presence of > or = 
10(-7) M ONO-3805, the formation of labeled DHT and its metabolite 5 
alpha-androstane-3 alpha,17 beta-diol was inhibited by > 90%. The inhibition 
pattern was non-competitive, and the inhibition constant (Ki value) derived from 
Lineweaver-Burk plots was 3.9 x 10(-11) M. Dispersed pituitary cells (1-2 x 
10(5)/ml) were cultured for 48 hours and then further incubated with or without 
androgen and/or the inhibitor for 72 hours (basal secretion). After this 
incubation, the media were saved, and 10 nM of luteinizing hormone-releasing 
hormone (LH-RH) with the same concentration of androgen and/or the inhibitor as 
used in the 72-hour incubation was added to the cultures for 6 hours 
(LH-RH-induced secretion). Secreted follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and 
luteinizing hormone (LH) were assayed by radioimmunoassay (RIA). Both 
testosterone (T) and DHT stimulated 72-hour basal FSH secretion from cultured 
pituitary cells in a dose-dependent fashion.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7721654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]