1. Parasite Immunol. 1995 Jan;17(1):37-45. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-3024.1995.tb00964.x.

Cellular responses during liver fluke infection in sheep and its evasion by the 
parasite.

Meeusen E(1), Lee CS, Rickard MD, Brandon MR.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Animal Biotechnology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia.

The cellular immune response in sheep to an acute and chronic primary and an 
acute secondary liver fluke infection were examined by immunohistology of liver 
tissue and flowcytometry of lymphocytes from the draining hepatic lymph nodes. 
Ten days after primary infection, portal tract areas surrounding migratory 
tunnels were infiltrated with CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes with fewer B cells and 
T19+ T cells. Micro abscesses were distributed sporadically in the liver 
parenchyma and young flukes could be easily observed in the liver tissue free 
from inflammatory cells. More intensive infiltration of the portal tract areas 
was observed during a secondary liver fluke infection characterized by a 
pronounced increase in eosinophils, B cells and CD4+ T cells. In addition, there 
was an increase in MHC class II+ fibroblastic-like cells surrounding the 
migratory tracts. In contrast to the primary infection, no young flukes were 
observed in the same tissue areas during the secondary infection. Chronic 
primary infections were characterized by perilobular fibrosis and a predominance 
of CD8+ and gamma delta-TCR+T19- T cells distributed within fibrotic strands. 
Distinct B cell follicles were observed in the fibrotic strands and near major 
bile ducts and necrotic patches. Pronounced lymphocyte infiltration could 
occasionally be observed surrounding liver fluke eggs lodged in liver tissue. A 
progressive increase in lymph node weight, cell number and CD4/CD8 ratio was 
observed in the acute and chronic primary infections. The role of the 
infiltrating cell populations and possible mechanism of immune evasion by the 
parasite are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.1995.tb00964.x
PMID: 7731734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]