1. Mol Gen Genet. 1995 Apr 20;247(2):137-47. doi: 10.1007/BF00705643.

Gain-of-function mutations in a human calmodulin-like protein identify residues 
critical for calmodulin action in yeast.

Harris E(1), Yaswen P, Thorner J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley 
94720-3202, USA.

A human epithelial cell-specific transcript (NB-1) encodes a calmodulin-like 
protein (hCLP), which is identical in length and 85% identical in amino acid 
sequence to authentic human calmodulin (hCaM). Although hCaM shares only 60% 
amino acid sequence identity with yeast calmodulin (CMD1 gene product), hCaM was 
able to substitute functionally for Cmd1 in yeast cells. In contrast, hCLP was 
unable to support either spore germination or vegetative growth in 
Cmd1-deficient yeast cells, even when stably expressed at a level at least an 
order of magnitude above that of hCaM. Thus, hCLP provides an indicator protein 
for discerning those residues that are critical for calmodulin function in vivo. 
In addition to 20 conservative amino acid replacements, hCLP differs from hCaM 
(and other vertebrate calmodulins that are able to complement a cmd1 null 
mutation) by only three nonconservative substitutions. Site-directed mutagenesis 
was used to convert these three positions back to residues more typical of those 
found in authentic calmodulins and to prepare all possible combinations of these 
three mutations, specifically: three single mutants (R58V, R112N, and A128E), 
three double mutants (R58V A128E, R112N A128E, and R58V R112N), and the triple 
mutant (R58V R112N A128E). The triple mutant and one of the double mutants (R58V 
A128E) were able to restore an apparently normal growth rate to a cmd1 delta 
strain, indicating that the altered hCLPs have acquired the ability to behave as 
functional calmodulins in yeast. The other two double mutants were able to 
support growth of Cmd1-deficient cells only weakly, but cells expressing the 
R112N A128E mutant grew noticeably better than those expressing the R58V R112N 
mutant. Remarkably, one single mutant (A128E), but not the other two single 
mutants, was also reproducibly able to support weak growth of a cmd1 delta 
strain. The properties of these gain-of-function, or neomorphic, mutations 
implicate E128, and to a lesser extent V58, as residues critical for calmodulin 
action in vivo. Molecular modeling of these positions within the structure of a 
Ca(2+)-calmodulin.peptide complex indicates that E128 projects directly into the 
central cavity occupied by the bound peptide. Thus, E128 may contribute a 
contact that is vital for the interaction of Cmd1 with one or more of the 
targets that are essential for yeast cell growth.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00705643
PMID: 7753022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]