1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 9;270(23):14024-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.23.14024.

Mutagenesis and the molecular modeling of the rat angiotensin II receptor (AT1).

Yamano Y(1), Ohyama K, Kikyo M, Sano T, Nakagomi Y, Inoue Y, Nakamura N, 
Morishima I, Guo DF, Hamakubo T, et al.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Biochemistry, Faculty of Agriculture, Tottori 
University, Japan.

The molecular interaction involved in the ligand binding of the rat angiotensin 
II receptor (AT1A) was studied by site-directed mutagenesis and receptor model 
building. The three-dimensional structure of AT1A was constructed on the basis 
of a multiple amino acid sequence alignment of seven transmembrane domain 
receptors and angiotensin II receptors and after the beta 2 adrenergic receptor 
model built on the template of the bacteriorhodopsin structure. These data 
indicated that there are conserved residues that are actively involved in the 
receptor-ligand interaction. Eleven conserved residues in AT1, His166, Arg167, 
Glu173, His183, Glu185, Lys199, Trp253, His256, Phe259, Thr260, and Asp263, were 
targeted individually for site-directed mutation to Ala. Using COS-7 cells 
transiently expressing these mutated receptors, we found that the binding of 
angiotensin II was not affected in three of the mutations in the second 
extracellular loop, whereas the ligand binding affinity was greatly reduced in 
mutants Lys199-->Ala, Trp253-->Ala, Phe259-->Ala, Asp263-->Ala, and 
Arg167-->Ala. These amino acid residues appeared to provide binding sites for 
Ang II. The molecular modeling provided useful structural information for the 
peptide hormone receptor AT1A. Binding of EXP985, a nonpeptide angiotensin II 
antagonist, was found to be involved with Arg167 but not Lys199.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.23.14024
PMID: 7775462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]