1. Biophys J. 1995 Apr;68(4):1443-52. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3495(95)80317-6.

Effects of a non-divalent cation binding mutant of myosin regulatory light chain 
on tension generation in skinned skeletal muscle fibers.

Diffee GM(1), Greaser ML, Reinach FC, Moss RL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706, USA.

Each myosin molecule contains two heavy chains and a total of four low-molecular 
weight light chain subunits, two "essential" and two "regulatory" light chains 
(RLCs). Although the roles of myosin light chains in vertebrate striated muscle 
are poorly understood at present, recent studies on the RLC have suggested that 
it has a modulatory role with respect to Ca2+ sensitivity of tension and the 
rate of tension development, effects that may be mediated by Ca2+ binding to the 
RLC. To examine possible roles of the RLC Ca2+/Mg2+ binding site in tension 
development by skeletal muscle, we replaced endogenous RLC in rabbit skinned 
psoas fibers with an avian mutant RLC (D47A) having much reduced affinity for 
divalent cations. After replacement of up to 80% of the endogenous RLC with D47A 
RLC, maximum tension (at pCa 4.5) was significantly reduced compared with 
preexchange tension, and the amount of decrease was directly related to the 
extent of D47A exchange. Fiber stiffness changed in proportion to tension, 
indicating that the decrease in tension was due to a decrease in the number of 
tension-generating cross-bridges. Decreases in both tension and stiffness were 
substantially, although incompletely, reversed after reexchange of native RLC 
for D47A. RLC exchange was also performed using a wild-type RLC. Although a 
small decrease in tension was observed after wild-type RLC exchange, the 
decrease was not proportional to the extent of RLC exchange and was not reversed 
by reexchange of the native RLC. D47A exchange also decreased the Ca2+ 
sensitivity of tension and reduced the apparent cooperativity of tension 
development. The results suggest that divalent cation binding to myosin RLC 
plays an important role in tension generation in skeletal muscle fibers.

DOI: 10.1016/S0006-3495(95)80317-6
PMCID: PMC1282039
PMID: 7787030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]