1. Eur J Biochem. 1993 Jun 15;214(3):787-94. doi: 
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1993.tb17981.x.

Expression and mutation of soybean beta-amylase in Escherichia coli.

Totsuka A(1), Fukazawa C.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Engineering Laboratory, National Food Research Institute, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Ibaraki, Japan.

The cDNA clones corresponding to soybean beta-amylase mRNA were isolated and 
sequenced. The cDNA contained an open-reading frame composed of 496 amino acids. 
The comparison of the amino acid sequence deduced from the cDNA with the 
N-terminal peptide sequence from mature enzyme proved that beta-amylase had no 
leader sequence. Employing the cDNA, the beta-amylase was directly synthesized 
in Escherichia coli by the expression vector pKK233-2 controlled by the tac 
promoter. The enzyme activity detected in E. coli lysate drastically increased 
with a lower cultivation temperature, and the total activity and specific 
activity of the enzyme in E. coli lysate cultured at 13 degrees C was 130-fold 
and 280-fold, respectively, the value at 37 degrees C. The enzyme produced in E. 
coli was purified by the affinity column chromatography of 
cyclomaltohexaose-immobilized Sepharose 6B. Employing the established expression 
and purification system of the enzyme, the functional ionizable groups in the 
active site were searched. His93, involving an imidazole, and Asp348, involving 
a carboxylate, in the highly conserved regions within the beta-amylases were 
replaced by Arg (H93R) and Ash (D348N) by site-directed mutagenesis, 
respectively. All beta-amylases, including the non-mutant and mutant 
beta-amylases, produced in E. coli exhibited lower Vmax values than that of 
beta-amylase isolated conventionally from soybean seeds. Especially the Vmax 
value of [H93R]beta-amylase was reduced drastically compared to that of the 
non-mutant; however, none of them lost their enzyme activities completely. 
Therefore, neither His93 nor Asp348 may participate in the catalytic reaction 
directly.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1993.tb17981.x
PMID: 8319688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]