1. Am J Physiol. 1993 Mar;264(3 Pt 1):G497-508. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.1993.264.3.G497.

Distribution and abundance of neutral endopeptidase (EC 3.4.24.11) in the 
alimentary tract of the rat.

Bunnett NW(1), Wu V, Sternini C, Klinger J, Shimomaya E, Payan D, Kobayashi R, 
Walsh JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, San Francisco 94143.

The distribution of neutral endopeptidase (NEP; EC 3.4.24.11) was examined in 
the alimentary tract of the rat. Immunoreactive NEP and NEP mRNA were localized 
to epithelial cells of the small intestine and to muscle cells in the stomach, 
small intestine, and colon by immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization 
histochemistry. NEP antisera recognized a protein on Western blots of membranes 
from gastric, jejunal, and colonic mucosa and gastric muscle with an 
electrophoretic mobility identical to that of recombinant human NEP 
(approximately 95 kDa). An antisense cRNA probe to NEP hybridized to RNA of 
approximately 3.5 kb and approximately 6.5 kb, corresponding to the primary 
transcripts of rat NEP, on Northern blots of total RNA from the jejunal mucosa. 
NEP message was detected in mRNA from jejunal and colonic mucosa and gastric, 
jejunal, and colonic muscle using a ribonuclease protection assay. NEP enzymatic 
activity, assessed by DL-thiorphan-inhibitable degradation of 
glutaryl-Ala-Ala-Phe-4-methoxy-2-naphthylamine, was highest in homogenates of 
jejunal mucosa (868 +/- 98 pmol.h-1 x micrograms protein-1) and was between 49- 
and 413-fold lower in other gastrointestinal tissues. The cellular origin of NEP 
in the gastric and colonic mucosa could not be determined.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.1993.264.3.G497
PMID: 8460703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]