1. Genomics. 1995 Oct 10;29(3):588-97. doi: 10.1006/geno.1995.9961.

Complete structural organization of the human alpha 1 (V) collagen gene 
(COL5A1): divergence from the conserved organization of other characterized 
fibrillar collagen genes.

Takahara K(1), Hoffman GG, Greenspan DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison 53706, USA.

Genes that encode the vertebrate fibrillar collagen types I-III have previously 
been shown to share a highly conserved intron/exon organization, thought to 
reflect common ancestry and evolutionary pressures at the protein level. We 
report here the complete intron/exon organization of COL5A1, the human gene that 
encodes the alpha 1 chain of fibrillar collagen type V. The structure of COL5A1 
is shown to be considerably diverged from the conserved structure of the genes 
for fibrillar collagen types I-III. COL5A1 has 66 exons, which is greater than 
the number of exons found in the genes for collagen types I-III. The increased 
number of exons is partly due to the increased size of the pro-alpha 1(V) 
N-propeptide, relative to the sizes of the N-propeptides of the types I-III 
procollagen molecules. In addition, however, the increased number of exons is 
due to differences in the intron/exon organization of the triple-helix coding 
region of COL5A1 compared to the organization of the triple-helix coding regions 
of the genes for collagen types I-III. Of particular interest is the increase of 
54 bp exons in this region of COL5A1, strongly supporting the proposal that the 
triple-helix coding regions of fibrillar collagen genes evolved from duplication 
of a 54 bp primordial genetic element. Moreover, comparison of the structure of 
COL5A1 to the highly conserved structure of the genes of collagen types I-III 
provides insights into the probable structure of the ancestral gene that gave 
rise to what appears to be two classes of vertebrate fibrillar collagen genes.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1995.9961
PMID: 8575750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]