1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jul 5;271(27):15971-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.27.15971.

Schizosaccharomyces pombe proliferating cell nuclear antigen mutations affect 
DNA polymerase delta processivity.

Arroyo MP(1), Downey KM, So AG, Wang TS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California 94305-5324, USA.

We introduced nine site-directed mutations into seven conserved fission yeast 
proliferative cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) residues, Leu2, Asp63, Arg64, Gly69, 
Gln201, Glu259, and Glu260, either as single or as double mutants. Both the 
recombinant wild type and mutant PCNAs were able to form homotrimers in solution 
and to sustain growth of a null pcna strain (Deltapcna). Wild type 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe PCNA and PCNA proteins with mutations in Asp63, 
Gln201, Glu259, or Glu260 to Ala were able to stimulate DNA synthetic activity 
and to enhance the processivity of calf thymus DNA polymerase delta holoenzyme 
similar to calf thymus PCNA. Mutations of Leu2 to Val or Arg64 to Ala, either 
singly or as a double mutant, yielded PCNA mutant proteins that had reduced 
capacity in enhancing the processivity of DNA polymerase delta but showed no 
deficiency in stimulation of the ATPase activity of replication factor C. S. 
pombe Deltapcna strains sustained by these two mutant-pcna alleles had moderate 
defects in growth and displayed elongated phenotypes. These cells, however, were 
not sensitive to UV irradiation. Together, these in vitro and in vivo studies 
suggest that the side chains of Leu2 and Arg64 in one face of the PCNA trimer 
ring structure are two of the several sites involved in tethering DNA polymerase 
delta for processive DNA synthesis during DNA replication.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.27.15971
PMID: 8663159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]