1. Biochemistry. 1996 Jun 18;35(24):7643-50. doi: 10.1021/bi952202r.

A refined model of the thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) receptor binding 
pocket. Experimental analysis and energy minimization of the complex between TRH 
and TRH receptor.

Perlman JH(1), Laakkonen LJ, Guarnieri F, Osman R, Gershengorn MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New 
York 10021, USA.

Seven transmembrane (TM) spanning, G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) appear to 
bind large glycoprotein hormones predominantly within their extracellular 
domains, small nonpeptidic ligands within the TM helical bundle, and peptide 
ligands within the extracellular domains and TM bundle. The tripeptide 
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH, pyroGlu-His-ProNH2) may bind entirely within 
the TM bundle of the TRH receptor (TRH-R). We have previously demonstrated 
direct binding contacts between the pyroGlu of TRH and two residues in TM helix 
3 (TM-3) of TRH-R and proposed a model of the binding pocket of TRH-R [Perlman, 
J. H., Laakkonen, L., Osman, R., & Gershengorn, M. C. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 
23383-23386]. Here, we provide evidence for two additional direct interactions 
between TRH and TRH-R. One interaction is between the aromatic ring of Tyr 282 
of TM-6 and His of TRH. This is based on a large increase in the half-maximally 
effective concentration (EC50) of TRH for stimulation of inositol phosphate 
formation by Y282A TRH-R and a loss of selectivity of this mutant receptor for 
TRH analogs substituted at His. We provide evidence for another interaction 
between Arg 306 of TM-7 and the terminal carboxamide of TRH. Using four direct 
interactions as anchors, a refined model of the TRH-R binding pocket was 
constructed using geometry optimization through energy minimization. A novel 
method for modeling GPCRs based on Monte Carlo and stochastic dynamics 
simulations is presented in the accompanying paper [Laakkonen, L. J., Guarnieri, 
F., Perlman, J. H., Gershengorn, M. C., & Osman, R. (1996) Biochemistry 35, 
7651-7663].

DOI: 10.1021/bi952202r
PMID: 8672465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]