1. J Virol. 1996 Jul;70(7):4538-48. doi: 10.1128/JVI.70.7.4538-4548.1996.

Constitutive phosphorylation of the vesicular stomatitis virus P protein 
modulates polymerase complex formation but is not essential for transcription or 
replication.

Spadafora D(1), Canter DM, Jackson RL, Perrault J.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Institute and Department of Biology, San Diego State 
University, San Diego, California 92182, USA.

As a subunit of both the P-L polymerase complex and the P-N assembly complex, 
the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) P protein plays a pivotal role in 
transcription and replication of the viral genome. Constitutive phosphorylation 
of this protein is currently thought to be essential for formation of the P-L 
complex. We recently identified the three relevant phosphate acceptor sites in 
the VSV Indiana serotype P protein (R. L. Jackson, D. Spadafora, and J. 
Perrault, Virology 214:189-197, 1995). We now report the effects of substituting 
Ala at these acceptor sites on transcription reconstitution in vitro and 
replication of defective interfering virus (DI) templates in vivo. The singly 
substituted S60A, T62A, and S64A mutants and the doubly substituted S60A/T62A 
and T62A/S64A mutants, all of which retain some constitutive phosphorylation, 
were nearly as active as the wild type in both assays. Surprisingly, the 
nonphosphorylated S60A/S64A protein was also active in transcription (> or = 
28%)) and replication (> or = 50%) under optimal conditions. However, this 
mutant was much less active in in vitro transcription (< or = 5% of wild type) 
at low P concentrations (<27 nM). In addition, S60A/S64A required higher 
concentrations of L protein than did the wild type for optimal DI replication in 
vivo. DI replication efficiency and intracellular accumulation of L, P, and N 
proteins in the transfected system were very similar to those in VSV-infected 
cells. We conclude that P protein constitutive phosphorylation is not essential 
for VSV RNA synthesis per se but likely plays an important role in vivo in 
facilitating P multimerization and possibly P-L complex formation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.70.7.4538-4548.1996
PMCID: PMC190390
PMID: 8676480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]