1. Blood. 1996 Aug 15;88(4):1183-7.

Moderation of hemophilia A phenotype by the factor V R506Q mutation.

Nichols WC(1), Amano K, Cacheris PM, Figueiredo MS, Michaelides K, Schwaab R, 
Hoyer L, Kaufman RJ, Ginsburg D.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor 48109-0650, USA.

Although many examples of unrelated hemophilia A patients carrying identical 
point mutations in the factor VIII (FVIII) gene have been reported, the clinical 
phenotype is not always the same among patients sharing the same molecular 
defect. Possible explanations for this discrepancy include undetected additional 
mutations in the FVIII gene or coinheritance of mutations at other genetic loci 
that modulate FVIII function. We report molecular genetic analysis of potential 
modifying genes in two sets of unrelated patients carrying common FVIII missense 
mutations but exhibiting different levels of clinical severity. Both mutations 
(FVIII R1689C and R2209Q) are associated with severe hemophilia A in some 
patients and mild/moderate disease in others. The common von Willebrand disease 
type 2N mutation (R91Q) was excluded as a modifying factor in these groups of 
patients. However, analysis of the recently described factor V (FV) R506Q 
mutation (leading to activated protein C resistance) identified a correlation of 
inheritance of this defect with reduced hemophilia A severity. Two moderately 
affected hemophilia A patients, each with either of two FVIII gene mutations, 
were heterozygous for FV R506Q, whereas two severely affected patients and two 
moderately affected patients were homozygous normal at the FV locus. Our results 
suggest that coinheritance of the FV R506Q mutation may be an important 
determinant of clinical phenotype in hemophilia A and that modification of the 
protein C pathway may offer a new strategy for the treatment of FVIII 
deficiency.

PMID: 8695835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]