1. J Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;134(1):117-32. doi: 10.1083/jcb.134.1.117.

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae actin-related protein Arp2 is involved in the actin 
cytoskeleton.

Moreau V(1), Madania A, Martin RP, Winson B.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie Mol√©culaire et Cellulaire du C.N.R.S. U.P.R. 9005, 
Strasbourg, France.

Arp2p is an essential yeast actin-related protein. Disruption of the 
corresponding ARP2 gene leads to a terminal phenotype characterized by the 
presence of a single large bud. Thus, Arp2p may be important for a late stage of 
the cell cycle (Schwob, E., and R.P. Martin, 1992. Nature (Lond.). 355:179-182). 
We have localized Arp2p by indirect immunofluorescence. Specific peptide 
antibodies revealed punctate staining under the plasma membrane, which partially 
colocalizes with actin. Temperature-sensitive arp2 mutations were created by PCR 
mutagenesis and selected by an ade2/SUP11 sectoring screen. One 
temperature-sensitive mutant that was characterized, arp2-H330L, was 
osmosensitive and had an altered actin cytoskeleton at a nonpermissive 
temperature, suggesting a role of Arp2p in the actin cytoskeleton. Random 
budding patterns were observed in both haploid and diploid arp2-H330L mutant 
cells. Endocytosis, as judged by Lucifer yellow uptake, was severely reduced in 
the mutant, at all temperatures. In addition, genetic interaction was observed 
between temperature-sensitive alleles arp2-H330L and cdc10-1. CDC10 is a gene 
encoding a neck filament-associated protein that is necessary for polarized 
growth and cytokinesis. Overall, the immunolocalization, mutant phenotypes, and 
genetic interaction suggest that the Arp2 protein is an essential component of 
the actin cytoskeleton that is involved in membrane growth and polarity, as well 
as in endocytosis.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.134.1.117
PMCID: PMC2120930
PMID: 8698808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]