1. Mol Microbiol. 1995 Dec;18(5):851-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1995.18050851.x.

Role of sigma S in transcription from the positively controlled Pm promoter of 
the TOL plasmid of Pseudomonas putida.

Marqués S(1), Gallegos MT, Ramos JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Estación Experimental del Zaidin, Granada, Spain.

Transcription from the TOL plasmid Pm promoter is dependent on the XylS 
regulator activated by benzoate effectors. We analysed transcription from Pm in 
several backgrounds with differing Escherichia coli alpha and sigma subunits of 
RNA polymerase. In different RpoA backgrounds, transcription from Pm was as high 
as in the wild-type background throughout the growth curve. In the sigma 
S-deficient background provided by E. coli RH90, high levels of transcription 
from Pm (XylS/3-methylbenzoate dependent) were observed in the early logarithmic 
growth phase but not in the late logarithmic phase or early stationary phase. 
This contrasted with the results obtained in the isogenic sigma S-proficient 
background, in which high levels of transcription were observed throughout the 
growth curve. XylS/3-methylbenzoate-dependent transcription from Pm in the late 
logarithmic growth phase in the RH90 background was restored by cloned rpoS. The 
transcription initiation point of Pm was the same regardless of the growth phase 
and the sigma S background. The requirement of sigma S for stimulation of 
transcription from Pm in the late logarithmic and early stationary phase was 
overcome by using certain mutant Pm promoters, e.g. Pm5 (C-47-->G, A-44-->G), 
and the mutant regulator XylSG44S. It is suggested that the transcription from 
Pm involves the use of two sigma factors: sigma 70 during the early logarithmic 
phase and sigma S thereafter.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1995.18050851.x
PMID: 8825089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]