1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 1;93(20):11068-73. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.93.20.11068.

Identification of the endothelial cell binding site for factor IX.

Cheung WF(1), van den Born J, Kühn K, Kjellén L, Hudson BG, Stafford DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Physiological Chemistry, University of Uppsala, 
Sweden.

We previously demonstrated that the primary region of factor IX and IXa 
responsible for saturable specific binding to bovine aortic endothelial cells 
resides in residues 3-11 at the amino terminus of factor IX. We also 
demonstrated that mutations of lysine to alanine at residue 5, factor IX K5A, or 
valine to lysine at residue 10, factor IX V10K, resulted in a molecule unable to 
bind to endothelial cells. Moreover, a mutation with lysine to arginine at 
residue 5, factor IX K5R, resulted in a factor IX molecule with increased 
affinity for the endothelial cell binding site. In this paper we report that 
collagen IV is a strong candidate for the factor IX binding site on endothelial 
cells. Factor IX and factor IX K5R compete with 125I-labeled factor IX for 
binding to tetrameric collagen IV immobilized on microtiter plates, while factor 
X, factor VII, and factor IX K5A or V10K fail to compete. The Kd for wild-type 
factor IX binding to collagen IV in the presence of heparin was 6.8 +/- 2 nM, 
and the Kd for factor IX K5R was 1.1 +/- 0.2 nM, which agrees well with our 
previously published Kd values of 7.4 and 2.4 nM for binding of the same 
proteins to endothelial cells. Our working assumption is that we have identified 
the endothelial cell binding site and that it is collagen IV. Its physiological 
relevance remains to be determined.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.20.11068
PMCID: PMC38285
PMID: 8855310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]