1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 1;271(44):27395-401. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.44.27395.

Role of amino acid residues in the active site of rat liver mercaptopyruvate 
sulfurtransferase. CDNA cloning, overexpression, and site-directed mutagenesis.

Nagahara N(1), Nishino T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nippon Medical School, 
1-1-5 Sendagi Bunkyo-ku, 113 Tokyo, Japan.

A complete amino acid structure of rat liver mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase 
(MST, EC 2.8.1.2) was determined by sequence analysis of cDNA and purified 
enzyme. The enzyme consists of 296 amino acid residues with a calculated 
molecular mass of 32,808 Da. Sequence identity in cDNA and the deduced amino 
acid sequence are 65 and 60% respectively, between rat MST and rhodanese. By 
their entire sequence similarity MST and rhodanese are confirmed to be 
evolutionarily related enzymes (Nagahara, N., Okazaki, T., and Nishino, T. 
(1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 16230-16235). The conversion of MST to rhodanese was 
attempted, and the role of amino acid residues was studied by site-directed 
mutagenesis with the isolated cDNA of rat liver MST. There is a strong 
possibility that Cys247 is a catalytic site of MST. Arg187 is suggested to be a 
binding site of both mercaptopyruvate and thiosulfate in MST. Arg196, which is 
missed in rhodanese, is important for catalysis in MST. On the other hand, the 
substitution of Arg for Gly248 or Lys for Ser249 facilitates catalysis of 
thiosulfate in MST. It is concluded that Arg187 and Arg196 of rat MST are 
critical residues in determining substrate specificity for mercaptopyruvate. On 
the other hand, Arg185, Arg247, and Lys248 of rat rhodanese are critical 
residues in determining substrate specificity for thiosulfate.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.44.27395
PMID: 8910318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]