1. Plant Physiol. 1996 Apr;110(4):1159-65. doi: 10.1104/pp.110.4.1159.

Molecular basis of alpha-methyltryptophan resistance in amt-1, a mutant of 
Arabidopsis thaliana with altered tryptophan metabolism.

Kreps JA(1), Ponappa T, Dong W, Town CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 
44106, USA.

A mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana, amt-1, was previously selected for resistance 
to growth inhibition by the tryptophan analog alpha-methyltryptophan. This 
mutant had elevated tryptophan levels and exhibited higher anthranilate synthase 
(AS) activity that showed increased resistance to feedback inhibition by 
tryptophan. In this study, extracts of the mutant callus exhibited higher AS 
activity than wild-type callus when assayed with either glutamine or ammonium 
sulfate as amino donor, thus suggesting that elevated AS activity in the mutant 
was due to an alteration in the alpha subunit of the enzyme. The mutant also 
showed cross-resistance to 5-methylanthranilate and 6-methylanthranilate and 
mapped to chromosome V at or close to ASA1 (a gene encoding the AS alpha 
subunit). ASA1 mRNA and protein levels were similar in mutant and wild-type leaf 
extracts. Levels of ASA1 mRNA and protein were also similar in callus cultures 
of mutant and wild type, although the levels in callus were higher than in leaf 
tissue. Sequencing of the ASA1 gene from amt-1 revealed a G to A transition 
relative to the wild-type gene that would result in the substitution of an 
asparagine residue in place of aspartic acid at position 341 in the predicted 
amino acid sequence of the ASA1 protein. The mutant allele in strain amt-1 has 
been renamed trp5-1.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.110.4.1159
PMCID: PMC160900
PMID: 8934623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]