1. Mol Biol Cell. 1997 Mar;8(3):387-98. doi: 10.1091/mbc.8.3.387.

Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate down-regulates Na,K-ATPase independent of its 
protein kinase C site: decrease in basolateral cell surface area.

Beron J(1), Forster I, Beguin P, Geering K, Verrey F.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Zurich, Switzerland.

The effect of protein kinase C (PKC) stimulation on the pump current (Ip) 
generated by the Na,K-ATPase was measured in A6 epithelia apically permeabilized 
with amphotericin B. Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) produced a decrease 
in Ip carried by sodium pumps containing the endogenous Xenopus laevis or 
transfected Bufo marinus alpha 1 subunits (approximately 30% reduction within 25 
min, maximum after 40 min) independent of the PKC phosphorylation site 
(T15A/S16A). In addition to this major effect of PMA, which was independent of 
the intracellular sodium concentration and was prevented by the PKC inhibitor 
bisindolylmaleimide GF 109203X (BIM), another BIM-resistant, PKC 
site-independent decrease was observed when the Ip was measured at low sodium 
concentrations (total reduction approximately 50% at 5 mM sodium). Using ouabain 
binding and cell surface biotinylation, stimulation of PKC was shown to reduce 
surface Na,K-ATPase by 14 to 20% within 25 min. The same treatment stimulated 
fluid phase endocytosis sevenfold and decreased by 16.5% the basolateral cell 
surface area measured by transepithelial capacitance measurements. In 
conclusion, PKC stimulation produces a decrease in sodium pump function which 
can be attributed, to a large extent, to a withdrawal of sodium pumps from the 
basolateral cell surface independent of their PKC site. This reduction of the 
number of sodium pumps is parallel to a decrease in basolateral membrane area.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.8.3.387
PMCID: PMC276091
PMID: 9188092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]