1. Biochemistry. 1997 Aug 12;36(32):9690-702. doi: 10.1021/bi970805s.

Structure and function of the xenobiotic substrate-binding site and location of 
a potential non-substrate-binding site in a class pi glutathione S-transferase.

Ji X(1), Tordova M, O'Donnell R, Parsons JF, Hayden JB, Gilliland GL, Zimniak P.

Author information:
(1)ABL-Basic Research Program, National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer 
Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702, USA.

Complex structures of a naturally occurring variant of human class pi 
glutathione S-transferase 1-1 (hGSTP1-1) with either S-hexylglutathione or 
(9R,10R)-9-(S-glutathionyl)-10-hydroxy-9, 10-dihydrophenanthrene 
[(9R,10R)-GSPhen] have been determined at resolutions of 1.8 and 1.9 A, 
respectively. The crystal structures reveal that the xenobiotic 
substrate-binding site (H-site) is located at a position similar to that 
observed in class mu GST 1-1 from rat liver (rGSTM1-1). In rGSTM1-1, the H-site 
is a hydrophobic cavity defined by the side chains of Y6, W7, V9, L12, I111, 
Y115, F208, and S209. In hGSTP1-1, the cavity is approximately half hydrophobic 
and half hydrophilic and is defined by the side chains of Y7, F8, V10, R13, 
V104, Y108, N204, and G205 and five water molecules. A hydrogen bond network 
connects the five water molecules and the side chains of R13 and N204. V104 is 
positioned such that the introduction of a methyl group (the result of the V104I 
mutation) disturbs the H-site water structure and alters the substrate-binding 
properties of the isozyme. The hydroxyl group of Y7 forms a hydrogen bond (3.2 
A) with the sulfur atom of the product. There is a short hydrogen bond (2.5 A) 
between Y108 (OH) and (9R, 10R)-GSPhen (O5), indicating the hydroxyl group of 
Y108 as an electrophilic participant in the addition of glutathione to epoxides. 
An N-(2-hydroxethyl)piperazine-N'-2-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) molecule is 
found in the cavity between beta2 and alphaI. The location and properties of 
this HEPES-binding site fit a possible non-substrate-binding site that is 
involved in noncompetitive inhibition of the enzyme.

DOI: 10.1021/bi970805s
PMID: 9245401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]