1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 29;272(35):22037-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.35.22037.

Interaction of calcium with native and decarboxylated human factor X. Effect of 
proteolysis in the autolysis loop on catalytic efficiency and factor Va binding.

Sabharwal AK(1), Padmanabhan K, Tulinsky A, Mathur A, Gorka J, Bajaj SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63104, USA.

Human factor X is a two-chain, 58-kDa, vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation 
zymogen. The light chain of factor X consists of an NH2-terminal 
gamma-carboxyglutamic acid (Gla) domain, followed by a few helical hydrophobic 
residues and the two epidermal growth factor-like domains, whereas the heavy 
chain contains the serine protease domain. In this study, native factor X was 
found to contain three classes of Ca2+-binding sites: two high affinity (Kd 100 
+/- 30 microM), four intermediate affinity (Kd 450 +/- 70 microM), and five to 
six low affinity (Kd 2 +/- 0.2 mM). Decarboxylated factor X in which the Gla 
residues were converted to Glu retained the two high affinity sites (Kd 140 +/- 
20 microM). In contrast, factor X lacking the Gla domain as well as a part of 
the helical hydrophobic residues (des-44-X) retained only one high affinity 
Ca2+-binding site (Kd 130 +/- 20 microM). Moreover, a synthetic peptide composed 
of residues 238-277 (58-97 in chymotrypsinogen numbering) from the protease 
domain of factor X bound one Ca2+ with high affinity (Kd 150 +/- 20 microM). 
From competitive inhibition assays for binding of active site-blocked factor Xa 
to factor Va in the prothrombinase complex, the Kd for peptide-Va interaction 
was calculated to be approximately 10 microM as compared with 30 pM for factor 
Xa and approximately 1.5 microM for decarboxylated factor Xa. A peptide 
containing residues 238-262(58-82) bound Ca2+ with reduced affinity (Kd 
approximately 600 microM) and did not inhibit Xa:Va interaction. In contrast, a 
peptide containing residues 253-277(73-97) inhibited Xa:Va interaction (Kd 
approximately 10 microM) but did not bind Ca2+. In additional studies, Ca2+ 
increased the amidolytic activity of native and des-44-Xa toward a tetrapeptide 
substrate (benzoyl-Ile-Glu-Gly-Arg-p-nitroanilide) by approximately 1.6-fold. 
The half-maximal increase was observed at approximately 150 microM Ca2+ and the 
effect was primarily on the kcat. Ca2+ also significantly protected cleavage at 
Arg-332-Gln-333(150-151) in the protease domain autolysis loop. Des-44-Xa in 
which the autolysis loop was cleaved possessed </=5% of the amidolytic activity 
of the noncleaved form; however, the S1 binding site was not affected, as 
determined by the p-aminobenzamidine binding. Additionally, autolysis 
loop-cleaved, active site-blocked native factor Xa was calculated to have 
approximately 10-fold reduced affinity for factor Va as compared with that of 
the noncleaved form.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.35.22037
PMID: 9268343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]