1. J Immunol. 1997 Sep 15;159(6):2815-23.

Involvement of the ras-like GTPase rab3d in RBL-2H3 mast cell exocytosis 
following stimulation via high affinity IgE receptors (Fc epsilonRI).

Roa M(1), Paumet F, Le Mao J, David B, Blank U.

Author information:
(1)Unit√© d'Immuno-Allergie, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. mroa@pasteur.fr

Aggregation of high affinity IgE receptors (Fc epsilonRI) expressed on mast 
cells and basophils is a potent stimulus for the release of inflammatory 
mediators from cytoplasmic granules. Fc epsilonRI-dependent exocytosis requires 
activation of protein kinase C and mobilization of calcium from intra- and 
extracellular stores. However, how these events ultimately regulate the membrane 
fusion step between cytoplasmic granules and the plasma membrane still remains 
unclear. In this study, we investigated the role of the small GTPases of the 
rab3 subfamily in the regulated exocytosis following stimulation of rat 
basophilic leukemia cells (RBL-2H3). Analysis using reverse-transcriptase-based 
PCR showed that RBL-2H3 cells expressed rab3a and rab3d isoforms, with a 
predominance of rab3d at the mRNA level. Investigation of the subcellular 
distribution using isoform-specific Abs demonstrated that the majority of rab3a 
was expressed in the cytosol, whereas rab3d was found predominantly in the 
membrane fraction. To determine whether these proteins play a role in Fc 
epsilonRI-triggered exocytosis, we established RBL-2H3 transfectants that 
overexpressed wild-type and expressed GTP-binding mutant forms (N135I) of rab3a 
and rab3d. Whereas expression of rab3a proteins did not significantly affect 
degranulation as tested by beta-hexosaminidase release, those of both wild-type 
and mutant rab3d proteins inhibited degranulation. Calculations of the initial 
fast and of the second slow release rates showed that they are both inhibited 
about twofold, suggesting that rab3d interferes with a rate-limiting step in Fc 
epsilonRI-stimulated exocytosis.

PMID: 9300704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]