1. Pediatr Res. 1997 Oct;42(4):430-5. doi: 10.1203/00006450-199710000-00002.

Analysis of phenylalanine hydroxylase genotypes and hyperphenylalaninemia 
phenotypes using L-[1-13C]phenylalanine oxidation rates in vivo: a pilot study.

Treacy EP(1), Delente JJ, Elkas G, Carter K, Lambert M, Waters PJ, Scriver CR.

Author information:
(1)DeBelle Laboratory for Biochemical Genetics, McGill University-Montreal, 
Children's Hospital Research Institute, Quebec, Canada.

Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) resulting from deficient activity of phenylalanine 
hydroxylase (PAH) is caused by mutations in the human PAH gene (McKusick 
261600). Herein, we report a noninvasive method to: 1) estimate whole-body 
phenylalanine oxidation in patients with HPA and 2) compare effects of mutant 
genotypes on phenotypes. We used oral L-[1-13C]phenylalanine as a substrate and 
measured 13CO2 formation in the first hour as an index of phenylalanine 
oxidation rates in: 1) patients with PKU (n = 6), variant phenylketonuria (PKU) 
(n = 7) and non-PKU HPA (n = 4); 2) obligate heterozygotes (n = 18); and 3) 
controls (n = 8). PAH mutations were identified by PCR, denaturing gradient gel 
electrophoresis, and DNA sequencing. Phenylalanine oxidation rates demonstrated 
a gene dosage effect; oxidation in heterozygotes was intermediate between 
probands and controls. The three classes of HPA had different mean oxidation 
rates (PKU < variant PKU < non-PKU HPA). The in vivo phenotype (HPA class or 
whole-body oxidation rate) did not always correspond to prediction from in vitro 
expression analysis of the mutation effect on enzyme activity. The findings 
indicate that the in vivo metrical trait (phenylalanine oxidation rate) is not a 
simple equivalent of phenylalanine hydroxylation activity (unit of protein 
phenotype) and, as expected, is an emergent property under the control of more 
than the PAH locus.

DOI: 10.1203/00006450-199710000-00002
PMID: 9380432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]