1. J Pharm Pharmacol. 1997 Nov;49(11):1150-6. doi: 
10.1111/j.2042-7158.1997.tb06059.x.

Cirsimarin and cirsimaritin, flavonoids of Microtea debilis (Phytolaccaceae) 
with adenosine antagonistic properties in rats: leads for new therapeutics in 
acute renal failure.

Hasrat JA(1), De Bruyne T, De Backer JP, Vauquelin G, Vlietinck AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Belgium.

In traditional medicine Microtea debilis is used against proteinuria. In 
ligand-binding studies extracts of Microtea debilis have been shown to inhibit 
the binding of [3H]1,3-dipropyl-8-cyclopentylxanthine ([3H]DPCPX) to 
adenosine-A1 receptors in rat forebrain membranes. Subsequently, cirsimarin, a 
flavonoid, was isolated as the active component and was shown to function as 
adenosine antagonist at the adenosine-A1 receptor in-vitro. In this study we 
have investigated the adenosine-A2 receptor activity of cirsimarin the in-vivo 
inhibition of the effects of adenosine by cirsimarin in rats, the absorption of 
cirsimarin and the inhibition of the binding of [3H]DPCPX to the adenosine-A1 
receptor by urine samples obtained after oral administration of crude extract of 
Microtea debilis, cirsimarin or cirsimaritin to rats. Cirsimarin inhibited the 
binding of [3H]5'-N-ethylcarboxamidoadenosine ([3H]NECA) to adenosine-A2 
receptors in rat striatum with an inhibition constant, Ki, of 6.5 +/- 0.3 
microM. The decrease of heart rate and blood pressure induced by adenosine was 
significantly inhibited by cirsimarin. After oral administration of 8 and 80 mg 
kg-1 cirsimarin, the compound could not be detected in either plasma or urine, 
but the presence of cirsimaritin was established. By use of beta-glucuronidase, 
glucuronides of cirsimaritin were also detected in the urine. The concentrations 
of cirsimaritin in the plasma were 0.126 +/- 0.04, 0.138 +/- 0.015, and 0.120 
+/- 0.022 microM, respectively, 2, 5 and 12 h after administration of 8 mg kg-1 
cirsimarin. The concentrations of cirsimaritin in the urine at the same times 
after administration of the same dose were 2.05 +/- 1.86, 5.05 +/- 2.6 and 2.06 
+/- 0.09 microM, respectively. The inhibition of the binding of [3H]DPCPX to the 
adenosine-A1 receptor by urine samples collected 2, 5 and 12 h after oral 
administration of 8 mg kg-1 cirsimarin or a crude extract of Microtea debilis 
containing approximately 8 mg kg-1 cirsimarin and 2.8 mg kg-1 cirsimaritin, or 
6.8 mg kg-1 cirsimaritin, was not significantly different from that of urine 
samples collected from untreated rats, in contrast with urine samples collected 
1 and 2 days after oral administration of 80 mg kg-1 cirsimarin. Approximately 
3% of the cirsimarin was excreted in the urine as cirsimaritin. The results 
indicate that in the kidney and urinary tract the concentrations of cirsimaritin 
produced after ingestion of more than 8 mg kg-1 cirsimarin can be high enough to 
inhibit the interaction of adenosine with its receptors; this might explain the 
effectiveness of Microtea debilis preparations against proteinuria in 
traditional medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/j.2042-7158.1997.tb06059.x
PMID: 9401955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]