1. Br J Haematol. 1998 Jan;100(1):229-34. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2141.1998.00535.x.

A(1,2)BO(1,2) genotyping by multiplexed allele-specific PCR.

Pearson SL(1), Hessner MJ.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Laboratories, The Blood Center of Southeastern Wisconsin, Milwaukee 
53233, USA.

The ABO blood group is the most clinically important human alloantigen system in 
transfusion medicine. The system involves three antigens A, B and H. H antigen 
is converted to either A or B by the activity of 
alpha1-->3-N-acetyl-galactosaminyl transferase (A transferase) or alpha1-->3 
galactosyl transferase (B transferase). The O phenotype is the result of an 
inactive glycosyltransferase, which is unable to glycosylate the H antigen. The 
immunological properties of the ABO system were identified at the turn of the 
century; however, the genetic basis of the ABO system has only recently been 
characterized. This has enabled the development of a number of molecular ABO 
typing methods. Described here is a two-reaction multiplex allele-specific PCR 
(ASPCR) genotyping assay for the A1, A2, B, O1 and O2 subtypes. 11 different 
allele-specific oligonucleotide primers were selected to detect the presence or 
absence of the O1 associated G--> (-) deletion at base 261, the O2 associated G 
--> A substitution at base 802, the B associated G --> A substitution at base 
803, and finally the A2 associated C --> (-) deletion at base 1059. A total of 
122 peripheral blood samples were genotyped and serologically forward and 
reverse typed. A concordance rate of 98.4% (120/122 samples) was observed 
between the actual genotype and the serologically-based predicted genotype. 
These results indicate that this assay provides a rapid, accurate, and simple 
method for A(1,2)BO(1,2) genotyping that serves as a useful supplement to 
standard serological ABO typing.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2141.1998.00535.x
PMID: 9450817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]