1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1998 Feb 15;350(2):223-32. doi: 10.1006/abbi.1997.0525.

Analysis of four residues within substrate recognition site 4 of human 
cytochrome P450 3A4: role in steroid hydroxylase activity and 
alpha-naphthoflavone stimulation.

Domanski TL(1), Liu J, Harlow GR, Halpert JR.

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA. 
domanski@pharmacy.arizona.edu

Sequence alignment of human cytochrome P450 3A4 with bacterial enzymes of known 
structure has provided a basis from which to predict residues involved in 
substrate oxidation. Substitutions were made at four residues (I301, F304, A305, 
and T309) predicted to be located within the highly conserved substrate 
recognition site 4. Site-directed mutants engineered to contain carboxy-terminal 
histidine tags were expressed in Escherichia coli and purified on a metal 
affinity column. The integrity of each protein was assessed by 
SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting. Functional analysis 
was performed using progesterone and testosterone as substrates and 
alpha-naphthoflavone as an activator. In testosterone hydroxylase assays, all of 
the mutants displayed rates of total product formation similar to wild-type 3A4, 
with several mutants showing small differences in specific products formed. 
However, with progesterone as the substrate, mutants F304A, A305V, and T309A 
exhibited altered product ratios and/or changes in the rates of product 
formation. F304A and A305V also displayed altered flavonoid stimulation that 
resulted in product ratios dramatically different from wild-type 3A4. Therefore, 
the kinetics of progesterone hydroxylation of these mutants and the wild-type 
enzyme were further assessed, and the data were analyzed with the Hill equation. 
Results with wild-type 3A4 and F304A indicated that at high progesterone 
concentrations, hydroxylation rates and product ratios are independent of the 
presence of alpha-NF. This suggests that progesterone may be equivalent to 
alpha-NF as an activator. In contrast, A305V exhibited autoactivation by 
progesterone but inhibition by alpha-NF.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1997.0525
PMID: 9473295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]