1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Feb 27;273(9):4823-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.9.4823.

The alpha-subunit of the heterotrimeric G protein G13 activates a phospholipase 
D isozyme by a pathway requiring Rho family GTPases.

Plonk SG(1), Park SK, Exton JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics and the Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, 
Tennessee 37232, USA.

G13 belongs to the G12 family of heterotrimeric G proteins, whose effectors are 
poorly defined. The present study was designed to test if phospholipase D (PLD) 
is regulated by G13 and if Rho-type small GTPases are involved. Expression of 
the constitutively active Q226L mutant of the alpha-subunit of G13 in COS-7 
cells stimulated the activity of a rat brain phospholipase D isozyme (rPLD1) 
co-expressed in the cells. Wild type Galpha13 was ineffective unless the cells 
were incubated with AlF4-. rPLD1 was previously shown to be activated by 
constitutively active V14RhoA in COS-7 cells (Park, S. K., Provost, J. J., Bae, 
C. D., Ho, W. T., and Exton, J. H. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 29263-29272). When 
the endogenous Rho proteins of the cells were inactivated by treatment with C3 
exoenzyme from Clostridium botulinum, the ability of Galpha13Q226L to activate 
rPLD1 was greatly attenuated. Co-transfection of dominant negative N19RhoA and 
N17Rac-1, but not N17Cdc42Hs or N17Ras, also inhibited the activation. 
Expression of constitutively active Galphaq in COS-7 cells also activated rPLD1, 
but constitutively active forms of Galphai2 and Galphas were without effect. 
These findings support an effector role for PLD in G13 signaling and demonstrate 
a requirement for Rho GTPases in this response.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.9.4823
PMID: 9478920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]