1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 6;273(10):5801-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.10.5801.

The dynamics of prostaglandin H synthases. Studies with prostaglandin h synthase 
2 Y355F unmask mechanisms of time-dependent inhibition and allosteric 
activation.

So OY(1), Scarafia LE, Mak AY, Callan OH, Swinney DC.

Author information:
(1)Inflammatory Diseases Unit, Roche Bioscience, Palo Alto, California 94304, 
USA.

Prostaglandin H synthases (PGHSs) catalyze the conversion of arachidonic acid to 
prostaglandins. In this report, we describe the effect of a PGHS2 Y355F mutation 
on the dynamics of PGHS2 catalysis and inhibition. Tyr355 is part of a 
hydrogen-bonding network located at the entrance to the cyclooxygenase active 
site. The Y355F mutant exhibited allosteric activation kinetics in the presence 
of arachidonic acid that was defined by a curved Eadie-Scatchard plot and a Hill 
coefficient of 1.36 +/- 0.05. Arachidonic acid-induced allosteric activation has 
not been directly observed with wild type PGHS2. The mutation also decreased the 
observed time-dependent inhibition by indomethacin, flurbiprofen, RS-57067, and 
SC-57666. Detailed kinetic analysis showed that the Y355F mutation decreased the 
transition state energy associated with slow-binding inhibition (EIdouble 
dagger) relative to the energy associated with catalysis (ESdouble dagger) by 
1.33, 0.67, and 1.06 kcal/mol, respectively, for indomethacin, flurbiprofen, and 
RS-57067. These observations show Tyr355 to be involved in the molecular 
mechanism of time-dependent inhibition. We interpret these results to indicate 
that slow binding inhibitors and the Y355F mutant slow the rate and unmask 
intrinsic, dynamic events associated with product formation. We hypothesize that 
the dynamic events are the equilibrium between relaxed and tightened 
organizations of the hydrogen-bonding network at the entrance to the 
cyclooxygenase active site. It is these rearrangements that control the rate of 
substrate binding and ultimately the rate of prostaglandin formation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.10.5801
PMID: 9488715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]