1. Virology. 1998 Feb 15;241(2):304-11. doi: 10.1006/viro.1997.8967.

A single conserved amino acid in the coat protein gene of pea seed-borne mosaic 
potyvirus modulates the ability of the virus to move systemically in Chenopodium 
quinoa.

Andersen K(1), Johansen IE.

Author information:
(1)Biotechnology Group, Danish Institute of Agricultural Sciences, Lyngby, 
Denmark.

Two isolates of pea seed-borne mosaic potyvirus, DPD1 and NY, which both infect 
pea (Pisum sativum) systemically, differ in their ability to move long distance 
in Chenopodium quinoa. DPD1 spreads to uninoculated leaves, whereas NY is 
restricted to the inoculated leaves. The NY isolate was found to move from cell 
to cell infecting all parts of the inoculated leaves, including the petiole. The 
coat protein (CP) coding region was identified as the determinant of 
long-distance movement. Virus chimeras containing the CP coding sequence of NY 
were restricted to inoculated leaves, whereas chimeras containing the CP coding 
sequence of DPD1 infected C. quinoa systemically. Mutational analysis of the CP 
demonstrated that changing the serine at position 47 of the NY CP to proline was 
sufficient to permit systemic spread of the NY(S47P) mutant. The reverse mutant, 
DPD1(P47S), in which the proline at position 47 of the CP was changed to serine, 
was restricted to inoculated leaves. The movement characteristics and CP 
sequences of 10 additional PSbMV isolates were determined. All isolates caused 
systemic infection in pea. In C. quinoa 6 of the isolates that were restricted 
to inoculated leaves had a serine at position 47. Two isolates that infected C. 
quinoa systemically had a proline at position 47. Two isolates, S6 and NEP-1, 
infected C. quinoa systemically, but had a serine at position 47 of the CP. This 
shows that although a proline/serine difference at position 47 of the CP 
determined systemic spread of the isolates DPD1 and NY, this amino acid alone 
does not govern the spread of PSbMV in C. quinoa.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1997.8967
PMID: 9499805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]