1. Thromb Haemost. 1998 Mar;79(3):602-8.

Platelets and endothelial cells act in concert to delay thrombolysis--evidence 
from an in vitro model of the human occlusive thrombus.

Hantgan RR(1), Jerome WG, Handt S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC 27157-1016, USA. rhantgan@bgsm.edu

The molecular and cellular mechanisms that over a period of hours render a human 
thrombus progressively resistant to fibrinolysis have been probed with a novel 
in vitro model. The kinetics of clot formation and fibrinolysis were monitored 
by laser light scattering with platelet-rich model thrombi contained in 
cylindrical flow chambers. In selected experiments, human umbilical vein 
endothelial cells were also cultured to confluence on the inner walls of these 
"glass blood vessels". Following an "aging" period (0.5, 2 or 4 h), each 
thrombus was gently perfused with a bolus of plasminogen/recombinant tissue 
plasminogen activator to induce fibrinolysis. Platelets delayed lysis of 2 
h-aged thrombi by approximately 70% and (non-stimulated) endothelial cells by 
approximately 30%, compared to cell-free control clots. However, even greater 
lytic delays (approximately 260%) resulted when both vascular cells were present 
in the same 2 h-aged thrombus. In contrast, rapid lysis was consistently 
achieved with R298E,R299E t-PA, a genetically engineered plasminogen activator 
that is insensitive to inhibition by plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1. 
These observations suggest platelets and endothelial cells act in concert to 
enrich the fibrin scaffold of an aging human thrombus in plasminogen activator 
inhibitor. We propose that the presence of both platelets and endothelial cells 
may contribute to progressive thrombolytic resistance.

PMID: 9531049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]