1. Hum Genet. 1998 Mar;102(3):334-42. doi: 10.1007/s004390050702.

Mutation analysis of the dystrophin gene in Southern French DMD or BMD families: 
from Southern blot to protein truncation test.

Tuffery S(1), Chambert S, Bareil C, Sarda P, Coubes C, Echenne B, Demaille J, 
Claustres M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie Génétique, CHU et CNRS ERS 155, Institut de 
Biologie, Montpellier, France.

Data from 6 years of experience in molecular diagnosis of Duchenne (DMD) and 
Becker (BMD) muscular dystrophy in Southern France are reported. DMD and BMD 
patients have been extensively analyzed for deletions and for point mutations in 
the dystrophin gene. By scanning the whole coding sequence as 
reverse-transcribed from lymphocytes or muscular RNA by the protein truncation 
test, we have reached a minimum of an 86% detection rate for point mutations 
responsible for DMD; these mutations consist of nonsense, frameshifting, and 
splicing mutations. Four of 12 small alterations identified in our sample are 
novel and described in this study. We also present an improved protocol for the 
automated detection of fluorescently labeled duplex polymerase chain reactions 
of six known intragenic microsatellites (Dys II, TG 15, STRs 44, 45, 49, and 
50). Accurate sizing of the alleles at each locus was performed, and we 
elucidated the sequence of several repeat units. Allele frequencies at each of 
the six microsatellite loci and at one restriction fragment length polymorphism 
site (intron 16/TaqI) were defined in a sample of normal, DMD, and BMD X 
chromosomes from Southern France. The determination of the grandparental origin 
of either deletions or point mutations revealed differences depending on the 
type of the mutation, with most of the deletions occurring in oogenesis and most 
of the point mutations occurring in spermatogenesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s004390050702
PMID: 9544849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]