1. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 15;273(20):12515-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.20.12515.

Function-structure studies and identification of three enzyme domains involved 
in the catalytic activity in rat hepatic squalene synthase.

Gu P(1), Ishii Y, Spencer TA, Shechter I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, F. Edward HÃ©bert School of 
Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20814-4799, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 1998 Jul 3;273(27):17296.

Rat hepatic squalene synthase (RSS, EC 2.5.1.21) contains three conserved 
sections, A, B, and C, that were proposed to be involved in catalysis (McKenzie, 
T. L., Jiang, G., Straubhaar, J. R., Conrad, D., and Shechter, I. (1992) J. 
Biol. Chem. 267, 21368-21374). Here we use the high expression vector pTrxRSS 
and site-directed mutagenesis to determine the specific residues in these 
sections that are essential for the two reactions catalyzed by RSS. Section C 
mutants F288Y, F288L, F286Y, F286W, F286L, Q293N, and Q283E accumulate 
presqualene diphosphate (PSPP) from trans-farnesyl diphosphate (FPP) with 
reduced production of squalene. F288L, which retains approximately 50% first 
step activity, displays only residual activity (0.2%) in the production of 
squalene from either FPP or PSPP. Substitution of either Phe288 or Phe286 with 
charged residues completely abolishes the enzyme activity. Thus, F288W, F288D, 
F288R, F286D, and F286R cannot produce squalene from either FPP or PSPP. All 
single residue mutants in Section A, except Tyr171, retain most of the RSS 
activity, with no detectable accumulation of PSPP in an assay mixture complete 
with NADPH. Y171F, Y171S, and Y171W are all inactive. Section B, which binds the 
diphosphate moieties of the allylic diphosphate subtrates, contains four 
negatively charged residues: Glu222, Glu226, Asp219, and Asp223. The two Glu 
residues can be replaced with neutral or with positively charged residues 
without signficantly affecting enzyme activity. However, replacement of either 
Asp residues with Asn eliminates all but a residual level of activity, and 
substitution with Glu abolishes all activity. These results indicate that 1) 
Section C, in particular Phe288, may be involved in the second step of 
catalysis, 2) Tyr171 of Section A is essential for catalysis, most likely for 
the first reaction, 3) the two Asp residues in Section B are essential for the 
activity and most likely bind the substrate via magnesium salt bridges. Based on 
these results, a mechanism for the first reaction is proposed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.20.12515
PMID: 9575210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]