1. Hum Mutat. 1998;11(5):372-6. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1998)11:5<372::AID-HUMU4>3.0.CO;2-M.

Germline mutations in Peruvian patients with hemophilia B: pattern of mutation 
in AmerIndians is similar to the putative endogenous germline pattern.

Heit JA(1), Thorland EC, Ketterling RP, Lind TJ, Daniels TM, Zapata RE, Ordonez 
SM, Kasper CK, Sommer SS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.

Exogenous (e.g., environmental) mutagens produce characteristic patterns of 
mutation. In contrast, endogenous mutation processes likely are associated with 
an invariant pattern of mutation. Analysis of factor IX gene mutations among 
large samples of hemophilia B patients from multiple, widely divergent 
geographic and ethnic populations reveals a remarkably constant mutational 
pattern, suggesting that the primary germline mutational process results from 
endogenous processes rather than environmental mutagens. To test this hypothesis 
further, we have initiated a study of hemophilia B patients from Peru because 
relatively large populations of AmerIndians can be found with low admixtures of 
other races. To determine if the factor IX (FIX) germline mutational pattern in 
AmerIndians differs from the common and putative endogenous pattern, FIX gene 
mutations were characterized in an initial sample of 10 AmerIndian Peruvian 
patients with hemophilia B. A minimum of 2.2 kb of the FIX gene was examined by 
PCR and direct sequencing of all eight exons, the splice junctions, and the 
promoter region. The pattern of germline mutation in AmerIndians was similar to 
the pattern of FIX germline mutations from larger U. S. Caucasian or Mexican 
Hispanic samples (P=0.55 and 0.63, respectively). The similar pattern in this 
initial sample of the Peru AmerIndian population provides additional support for 
the inference that the FIX germline mutational pattern results from 
predominantly endogenous processes rather than exogenous mutagens.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1998)11:5<372::AID-HUMU4>3.0.CO;2-M
PMID: 9600455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]