1. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Jun;12(6):775-84. doi: 10.1210/mend.12.6.0124.

A homozygous mutation in the luteinizing hormone receptor causes partial Leydig 
cell hypoplasia: correlation between receptor activity and phenotype.

Martens JW(1), Verhoef-Post M, Abelin N, Ezabella M, Toledo SP, Brunner HG, 
Themmen AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Reproduction, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Erasmus University Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
martens@endov.fgg.eur.nl

Leydig cell hypoplasia (LCH) is characterized by a decreased response of the 
Leydig cells to LH. As a result, patients with this syndrome display aberrant 
male development ranging from complete pseudohermaphroditism to males with 
micropenis but with otherwise normal sex characteristics. We have evaluated 
three brothers with a mild form of LCH. Analysis of their LH receptor (LHR) gene 
revealed a homozygous missense mutation resulting in a substitution of a lysine 
residue for a isoleucine residue at position 625 of the receptor. In vitro 
analysis of this mutant LHR, LHR(I625K), in HEK293 cells indicated that the 
signaling efficiency was significantly impaired, which explains the partial 
phenotype. We have compared this mutant LHR to two other mutant LHRs, LHR(A593P) 
and LHR(S616Y), identified in a complete and partial LCH patient, respectively. 
Although the ligand-binding affinity for all three mutant receptors was normal, 
the hormonal response of LHR(A593P) was completely absent and that of LHR(S616Y) 
and LHR(I625K) was severely impaired. Low cell surface expression explained the 
reduced response of LHR(S616Y), while for LHR(I625K) this diminished response 
was due to a combination of low cell surface expression and decreased coupling 
efficiency. For LHR(A593P), the absence of a reduced response resulted from both 
poor cell surface expression and a complete deficiency in coupling. Our 
experiments further show a clear correlation between the severity of the 
clinical phenotype of patients and overall receptor signal capacity, which is a 
combination of cell surface expression and coupling efficiency.

DOI: 10.1210/mend.12.6.0124
PMID: 9626653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]