1. Hum Genet. 1998 May;102(5):562-5. doi: 10.1007/s004390050740.

LDL-R and Apo-B-100 gene mutations in Polish familial hypercholesterolemias.

Górski B(1), Kubalska J, Naruszewicz M, Lubiński J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Pomeranian Medical Academy, Szczecin, 
Poland. gorski@free.polbox.pl

A group of 30 Polish families with clinical signs of familial 
hypercholesterolemia was studied for the presence of germ-line mutations in the 
LDL-R and ApoB-100 genes. Screening of the LDL-R gene was performed at the 
genomic DNA level by single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis of all 18 
exons and extended by sequencing of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products 
showing abnormalities. The occurrence of large LDL-R gene alterations was 
evaluated by analysis of restriction enzyme patterns on Southern blots and using 
the long-PCR technique. The ApoB-100 gene was studied by combined 
allele-specific and asymmetric PCR for the occurrence of the common B-3500 
missense mutation G to A at nucleotide position 10,708. Germ-line mutations were 
found in 17 families. In 12 of them LDL-R gene mutations were detected. Three of 
11 different mutations had previously been described in other populations (3-bp 
deletion of codon 197; Ser156Leu; Gly571Glu). Of the mutations not previously 
recognized and identified in Polish families, there were three small deletions 
(2-bp deletion AG at codon 291; 4-bp deletion CCCT at codons 661-662; 1-bp 
deletion A at codon 830), and four point mutations (Arg239Stop, Cys331Stop, 
Asn543Ser, Gln665Stop). Additionally, one large (approximately 1-kb) LDL-R gene 
deletion between exons 6 and 9 was identified. In five families, the B-3500 
mutation within the ApoB-100 gene was revealed.

DOI: 10.1007/s004390050740
PMID: 9654205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]