1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 24;273(30):18992-9001. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.30.18992.

Effect of CTP synthetase regulation by CTP on phospholipid synthesis in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Ostrander DB(1), O'Brien DJ, Gorman JA, Carman GM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science, Cook College, New Jersey Agricultural Experiment 
Station, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901, USA.

CTP synthetase (EC 6.3.4.2, UTP:ammonia ligase (ADP-forming)) activity in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is allosterically regulated by CTP product inhibition. 
Amino acid residue Glu161 in the URA7-encoded and URA8-encoded CTP synthetases 
was identified as being involved in the regulation of these enzymes by CTP 
product inhibition. The specific activities of the URA7-encoded and URA8-encoded 
enzymes with a Glu161 --> Lys (E161K) mutation were 2-fold greater when compared 
with the wild-type enzymes. The E161K mutant URA7-encoded and URA8-encoded CTP 
synthetases were less sensitive to CTP product inhibition with inhibitor 
constants for CTP of 8.4- and 5-fold greater, respectively, than those of their 
wild-type counterparts. Cells expressing the E161K mutant enzymes on a multicopy 
plasmid exhibited an increase in resistance to the pyrimidine poison and cancer 
therapeutic drug cyclopentenylcytosine and accumulated elevated (6-15-fold) 
levels of CTP when compared with cells expressing the wild-type enzymes. Cells 
expressing the E161K mutation in the URA7-encoded CTP synthetase exhibited an 
increase (1.5-fold) in the utilization of the Kennedy pathway for 
phosphatidylcholine synthesis when compared with control cells. Cells bearing 
the mutation also exhibited an increase in the synthesis of phosphatidylcholine 
(1.5-fold), phosphatidylethanolamine (1.3-fold), and phosphatidate (2-fold) and 
a decrease in the synthesis of phosphatidylserine (1.7-fold). These alterations 
were accompanied by an inositol excretion phenotype due to the misregulation of 
the INO1 gene. Moreover, cells bearing the E161K mutation exhibited an increase 
(1.6-fold) in the ratio of total neutral lipids to phospholipids, an increase in 
triacylglycerol (1.4-fold), free fatty acids (1.7-fold), and ergosterol ester 
(1.8-fold), and a decrease in diacylglycerol (1. 3-fold) when compared with 
control cells. These data indicated that the regulation of CTP synthetase 
activity by CTP plays an important role in the regulation of phospholipid 
synthesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.30.18992
PMID: 9668079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]