1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jul 21;95(15):8630-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.15.8630.

Disruption of a PEX1-PEX6 interaction is the most common cause of the neurologic 
disorders Zellweger syndrome, neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy, and infantile 
Refsum disease.

Geisbrecht BV(1), Collins CS, Reuber BE, Gould SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Peroxisomal matrix protein import requires the action of two AAA ATPases, PEX1 
and PEX6. Mutations in either the PEX1 or PEX6 gene are the most common cause of 
the lethal neurologic disorders Zellweger syndrome, neonatal 
adrenoleukodystrophy, and infantile Refsum disease and account for disease in 
80% of all such patients. We report here that overexpression of PEX6 can 
suppress the phenotypes of certain PEX1-deficient cells, that overexpression of 
PEX1 can suppress the phenotypes of certain PEX6-deficient cells, and that these 
instances of suppression are allele-specific and require partial activity of the 
mutated gene. In addition to genetic evidence for interaction between PEX1 and 
PEX6, we find that the PEX1 and PEX6 proteins interact in the yeast two-hybrid 
assay and physically associate with one another in vitro. We previously 
identified a missense mutation in PEX1, G843D, which attenuates PEX1 function 
and is the most common cause of these diseases, present in one-third of all such 
patients. The G843D mutation attenuates the interaction between PEX1 and PEX6 in 
both the two-hybrid system and in vitro and appears to be suppressed by 
overexpression of PEX6. We conclude that PEX1 and PEX6 form a complex of central 
importance to peroxisome biogenesis and that mutations affecting this complex 
constitute the most common cause of the Zellweger syndrome spectrum of diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.15.8630
PMCID: PMC21127
PMID: 9671729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]