1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 1998 Jul 20;14(11):979-88. doi: 
10.1089/aid.1998.14.979.

Genetic evidence of the interaction between tRNA(Lys,3) and U5 facilitating 
efficient initiation of reverse transcription by human immunodeficiency virus 
type 1.

Zhang Z(1), Kang SM, Morrow CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 35294, USA.

Previous studies using in vitro chemical and enzyme methods demonstrated that, 
in addition to the primer-binding site (PBS), two regions upstream of the PBS in 
U5 of HIV-1 RNA interact with tRNA(Lys,3) during the initiation of reverse 
transcription. One region corresponds to nucleotides 167-172 of U5, which are 
complementary to the anticodon region of tRNA(Lys,3); a second region 
corresponds to nucleotides 142-145 of U5, which interacts with nucleotides 43-46 
of tRNA(Lys,3). To study the importance of these viral RNA-tRNA interactions in 
reverse transcription and viral replication, we mutated the two corresponding 
regions in the infectious HIV-1 proviral DNA (HXB2). Changing nucleotides 
167-172 from GAAAAU to CCACAA (which is complementary to the anticodon of 
tRNA(His)) or changing nucleotides 142-144 from CCC to GGG did not affect 
protein expression or production of virus from transfected proviral DNAs. 
Analysis of these viruses revealed that, although all were infectious, the 
initial replication was delayed compared with wild-type virus. Using an 
endogenous reverse transcription-PCR assay, we found that the initiation of the 
reverse transcription in the mutant viruses was less efficient than that for the 
wild-type virus. Analysis of the proviral DNA sequences after 2 months of in 
vitro culture revealed that most progeny viruses derived from the mutant that 
contained the CCACAA motif had acquired nucleotide substitutions within and 
surrounding the CCACAA nucleotides. All the viruses recovered from the mutant 
that originally contained the GGG nucleotides reverted back to contain the 
wild-type CCC sequence. The majority of the proviral clones derived from virus 
containing the double mutations had gained additional mutations within the 
CCACAA and GGG motifs. The replication of the mutant viruses was now similar to 
that of the wild type. The results of these studies demonstrate that 
interactions between the tRNA and U5 are important for generation of an 
optimized initiation complex required for efficient reverse transcription.

DOI: 10.1089/aid.1998.14.979
PMID: 9686644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]