1. Hum Mutat. 1998;12(3):177-85. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1998)12:3<177::AID-HUMU5>3.0.CO;2-E.

Detection of known and new mutations in the thiopurine S-methyltransferase gene 
by single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis.

Spire-Vayron de la Moureyre C(1), Debuysère H, Sabbagh N, Marez D, Vinner E, 
Chevalier ED, Lo Guidice JM, Broly F.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Hôpital Calmette, Centre 
Hospitalier Régional et Universitaire de Lille, France.

To detect mutations in the thiopurine S-methyltransferase gene (TPMT), we have 
developed a strategy based on single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) 
analysis of the gene amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The 
sensitivity of the method was first evaluated by analyzing DNA samples from five 
individuals, including two high methylators (HMs), two intermediate methylators 
(IMs), and one deficient methylator (DM). TPMT alleles and mutations in each of 
these individuals had previously been characterized by conventional PCR-based 
assays and direct sequencing analysis. All mutations were associated with 
particular shifts in the electrophoretic mobility of DNA fragments, allowing 
their identification. We further tested the efficiency of the strategy to detect 
new TPMT mutations. For this purpose, additional DNAs from 15 IMs and 15 HMs 
were submitted to PCR-SSCP analysis. A total of 7 alleles were characterized, 
including two new alleles. The first one, termed TPMT*1A, harbors a single 
mutation C-->T at nucleotide -178 in exon 1 and was detected in a HM subject. 
The second one, termed TPMT*7, was characterized by a T-->G transversion at 
nucleotide 681 in exon 10. This allele should be a nonfunctional allele of the 
TPMT gene since it was observed in combination with a wild-type allele in an 
intermediate methylator. We conclude that the PCR-SSCP strategy we developed 
could be advantageously used to fully characterize the extent of allelic 
variation at the TPMT gene locus in populations and thus to improve our 
understanding of the genetic polymorphism of TPMT activity, which has 
considerable consequences for the toxicity and efficacy of therapeutically 
important and widely used drugs.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1998)12:3<177::AID-HUMU5>3.0.CO;2-E
PMID: 9711875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]