1. Br J Haematol. 1998 Sep;102(5):1172-5. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2141.1998.00898.x.

Prevalence of hereditary haemochromatosis in premature atherosclerotic vascular 
disease.

Franco RF(1), Zago MA, Trip MD, ten Cate H, van den Ende A, Prins MH, Kastelein 
JJ, Reitsma PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, 
University of São Paulo, FUNDHERP, Brazil.

It has been proposed that iron accumulation may contribute to atherogenesis by 
increasing free radical formation and oxidative stress. Epidemiological studies 
in which the association of iron status with atherosclerosis was assessed raised 
conflicting results. To test whether genetic haemochromatosis is associated with 
increased atherosclerosis, we determined the prevalence of two mutations in the 
HFE gene related to haemochromatosis (845G-->A; Cys282Tyr. and 187 C-->G, 
His63Asp) in 265 consecutive patients with premature (<50 years of age) 
angiographically-proven atherosclerotic disease (coronary and/or peripheral), 
and in 272 healthy controls. PCR amplification followed by RsaI (Cys282Tyr 
analysis) and BclI (His63Asp analysis) restriction digestion was employed to 
define the genotypes. The mutant Cys282Tyr allele had a frequency of 0.07 among 
controls and 0.04 among patients (carrier frequency of 14.0% and 8.3%, 
respectively). The frequency of the His63Asp mutant allele was 0.14 (28.6% of 
carriers) in controls and 0.11 (22.2% of carriers) in patients. Five of 265 
patients (1.1%) and 9/272 controls (3.3%) were compound heterozygotes. In 
conclusion, a lower prevalence of the Cys 282Tyr mutation and a similar 
frequency of the His63Asp mutation was observed in patients with atherosclerotic 
disease in comparison with normal controls. These findings do not support an 
association between haemochromatosis and atherogenesis.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2141.1998.00898.x
PMID: 9753040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]