1. J Biotechnol. 1998 Aug 12;63(2):137-46. doi: 10.1016/s0168-1656(98)00081-9.

Aberrant processing of wild-type and mutant bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor 
secreted by Aspergillus niger.

MacKenzie DA(1), Kraunsoe JA, Chesshyre JA, Lowe G, Komiyama T, Fuller RS, 
Archer DB.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Food Research, Norwich Research Park, Colney, UK.

Bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) was secreted by Aspergillus niger at 
yields of up to 23 mg l-1 using a protein fusion strategy. BPTI was linked to 
part of the fungal glucoamylase protein (GAM) with a dibasic amino acid (KEX2) 
processing site at the fusion junction. Electrospray ionisation mass 
spectrometry and N-terminal protein sequencing revealed that, although 
biologically active in vitro, the purified products from a number of independent 
transformants consisted of a mixture of BPTI molecules differing at the 
N-terminus. Approximately 35-60% of this mixture was processed correctly. 
Aberrant processing of the GAM-BPTI fusion protein by the A. niger KEX2-like 
endoprotease was the most likely cause of this variation although the 
involvement of other fungal endoproteases could not be ruled out. In vitro 
studies have highlighted a weak interaction between BPTI and the Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae KEX2 endoprotease, suggesting that BPTI is not a potent inhibitor of 
KEX2p. A small proportion of the recombinant BPTI (10%) showed 'nicking' of the 
K15-A16 bond, indicating an interaction with a fungal trypsin-like enzyme. 
Mutant BPTI homologues designed to have anti-elastase activity, BPTI(K15V), 
BPTI(K15V,P13I) and BPTI(K15V,G12A), have also been expressed and secreted by A. 
niger. They also showed a similar spectrum of aberrant N-terminal processing but 
no 'nicking' of the K15-V16 bond was observed. Comparison of A. niger with other 
expression systems showed that it is an effective system for producing BPTI and 
its homologues, although not all molecules were correctly processed. This 
variation in processing efficiency may be useful in understanding the important 
determinants of protein processing in this fungus.

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-1656(98)00081-9
PMID: 9772752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]