1. Diabetologia. 1998 Nov;41(11):1304-8. doi: 10.1007/s001250051069.

The C825T polymorphism in the human G-protein beta3 subunit gene is not 
associated with diabetic nephropathy in Type I diabetes mellitus.

Fogarty DG(1), Zychma MJ, Scott LJ, Warram JH, Krolewski AS.

Author information:
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

In Type I (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus a genetic predisposition exists 
to nephropathy and is related to parental hypertension. Enhanced G-protein 
activation, a cellular phenotype observed in cultured cells from patients with 
essential hypertension, was recently documented in Type I diabetic subjects with 
nephropathy. This enhanced G-protein activation has been associated with a 
genetic variant in the G-protein beta3 subunit, GNB3. A C-->T polymorphism at 
position 825 in exon 10 is associated with G-protein activation, the T allele 
associated with enhanced activity. Furthermore the T allele was observed more 
frequently in a group with essential hypertension. In this report we have 
analysed the role of the C825T polymorphism in the predisposition to diabetic 
nephropathy in Type I diabetes. We have investigated the frequency of this 
polymorphism in a large case-control study and found no association of the T 
allele with diabetic nephropathy. Specifically carriage of the T allele as CT or 
TT was observed in 49% of 200 Type I diabetic control subjects with 
normoalbuminuria (diabetes duration 24 years) compared with 53% of 216 Type I 
diabetic subjects with nephropathy (overt proteinuria or end-stage renal 
failure). Within this group we have also examined the inheritance of C825T 
alleles in a family study and found no evidence for excess transmission of the T 
allele to Type I diabetic offspring with nephropathy (T allele transmitted to 
51% of nephropathy offspring, C allele transmitted to 49% of nephropathy 
offspring, p = 0.79). In none of the Type I diabetic datasets examined was there 
any effect of genotype on variation in systolic or diastolic blood pressure. In 
conclusion we can find no evidence for the C825T polymorphism of the beta3 
G-protein subunit as a major gene in the susceptibility to diabetic nephropathy 
in Type I diabetes.

DOI: 10.1007/s001250051069
PMID: 9833937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]