1. J Cell Biol. 1998 Dec 14;143(6):1427-36. doi: 10.1083/jcb.143.6.1427.

Chromosomal proteins HMG-14 and HMG-17 are released from mitotic chromosomes and 
imported into the nucleus by active transport.

Hock R(1), Scheer U, Bustin M.

Author information:
(1)Protein Section, Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Division of Basic 
Sciences, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892, USA.

The high mobility group 14/17 (HMG-14/-17) proteins form specific complexes with 
nucleosome core particles and produce distinct footprints on nucleosomal DNA. 
Therefore, they could be an integral part of the chromatin fiber. Here we show 
that during the cell cycle these proteins are transiently dissociated from 
chromatin. They colocalize with the nuclear DNA in interphase and prophase but 
not in metaphase and anaphase. They relocate into the nucleus and colocalize 
again with the DNA in late telophase, concomitantly with the appearance of the 
nuclear envelope. Thus, these nucleosomal binding proteins are not always 
associated with chromatin. Using reconstituted nuclei and permeabilized cells, 
we demonstrate that these two small proteins, with a molecular mass <10 kD, are 
actively imported into the nucleus. We identify the major elements involved in 
the nuclear import of these chromosomal proteins: HMG-14/-17 proteins contain an 
intrinsic bipartite nuclear localization signal, and their entry into the 
nucleus through nuclear pores requires energy and the participation of importin 
alpha. These findings suggest that the cell cycle-related association of 
HMG-14/-17 with chromatin is dependent on, and perhaps regulated by, nuclear 
import processes.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.143.6.1427
PMCID: PMC2132996
PMID: 9852141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]