1. Endocr Res. 1998 Aug-Nov;24(3-4):817-25. doi: 10.3109/07435809809032692.

The molecular basis of isolated 17,20 lyase deficiency.

Miller WL(1), Geller DH, Auchus RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0978, 
USA.

Human P450c17 catalyzes the 17alpha-hydroxylation of pregnenolone to 17OH 
pregnenolone and of progesterone to 17alpha-OH progesterone; the same P450c17 
enzyme also catalyzes 17,20 lyase activity on the same active site, converting 
17OH-pregnenolone to DHEA. Rodent and porcine P450c17 also catalyze 17,20 lyase 
activity with delta4 substrates, converting 17OH-progesterone to delta4 
androstenedione, but human P450c17 catalyzes this reaction very inefficiently, 
so that virtually all human C19 sex steroids are made via 17OH pregnenolone and 
DHEA. P450c17 is encoded by a single gene and a single species of mRNA. Many 
mutations of this gene have been described, but until recently all of these 
either entirely eliminated both 17alpha-hydroxylase and 17,20 lyase activity, or 
affected each activity equivalently. We have identified and characterized the 
first patients with P450c17 mutations that selectively ablate 17,20 lyase 
activity while retaining 17alpha-hydroxylase activity. Through a combination of 
enyzmologic experiments in transfected mammalian cells and in genetically 
manipulated yeast, plus a computer model of human P450c17, we have proven that 
the responsible mutations, R347H and R358Q lie in the redox-partner binding site 
of P450c17. This site, through which P450c17 interacts with P450 oxidoreductase 
to receive the electrons needed for catalysis, can be allosterically influenced 
by cytochrome b5. These two mutations have contributed substantially to our 
understanding of the mechanisms by which 17alpha-hydroxylase and 17,20 lyase 
activities are regulated independently, and thus have contributed to the study 
of regulated 17,20 lyase activity in adrenarche, aging, and the polycystic ovary 
syndrome.

DOI: 10.3109/07435809809032692
PMID: 9888582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]