1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 29;274(5):3094-102. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.5.3094.

Differential role of insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 and IRS-2 in L6 skeletal 
muscle cells expressing the Arg1152 --> Gln insulin receptor.

Miele C(1), Caruso M, Calleja V, Auricchio R, Oriente F, Formisano P, Condorelli 
G, Cafieri A, Sawka-Verhelle D, Van Obberghen E, Beguinot F.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare & Centro di 
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 
Federico II University of Naples, 80131 Naples, Italy.

In L6 muscle cells expressing the Arg1152 --> Gln insulin receptor (Mut), basal 
tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 was increased by 
35% compared with wild-type cells (WT). Upon exposure to insulin, IRS-1 
phosphorylation increased by 12-fold in both the Mut and WT cells. IRS-2 was 
constitutively phosphorylated in Mut cells and not further phosphorylated by 
insulin. The maximal phosphorylation of IRS-2 in basal Mut cells was paralleled 
by a 4-fold increased binding of the kinase regulatory loop binding domain of 
IRS-2 to the Arg1152 --> Gln receptor. Grb2 and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
association to IRS-1 and IRS-2 reflected the phosphorylation levels of the two 
IRSs. Mitogen-activated protein kinase activation and [3H]thymidine 
incorporation closely correlated with IRS-1 phosphorylation in Mut and WT cells, 
while glycogen synthesis and synthase activity correlated with IRS-2 
phosphorylation. The Arg1152 --> Gln mutant did not signal Shc phosphorylation 
or Shc-Grb2 association in intact L6 cells, while binding Shc in a yeast 
two-hybrid system and phosphorylating Shc in vitro. Thus, IRS-2 appears to 
mediate insulin regulation of glucose storage in Mut cells, while 
insulin-stimulated mitogenesis correlates with the activation of the 
IRS-1/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway in these cells. IRS-1 and 
Shc-mediated mitogenesis may be redundant in muscle cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.5.3094
PMID: 9915848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]