1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jan 19;254(2):450-3. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1998.9962.

Pro12Ala missense mutation of the peroxisome proliferator activated receptor 
gamma and diabetes mellitus.

Ringel J(1), Engeli S, Distler A, Sharma AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Nephrology, 
UniversitÃ¤tsklinikum Benjamin Franklin, Free University of Berlin, Berlin, 
Federal Republic of Germany.

Peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) is a nuclear 
receptor that regulates adipocyte differentiation and possibly lipid metabolism 
and insulin sensitivity. Therefore, PPARgamma is a promising candidate gene for 
several disorders including diabetes, obesity, and dyslipoproteinemia. Screening 
for mutations in the entire coding region of the PPARgamma gene yielded a 
missense C --> G mutation at codon 12, resulting in the substitution of proline 
with alanine (Pro12Ala). The objective of our study was to examine the 
relationship between this genetic variant and diabetes and associated diseases 
in a large group of patients with type 1 (n = 522) and type 2 (n = 503) 
diabetes. Allelic frequencies of the PPARgamma2 12Ala allele were similar 
between patients with either type of diabetes and comparable to that in healthy 
controls (n = 310). There was also no significant relationship between 
dyslipoproteinemia or obesity and the PPARgamma2 Pro12Ala genotype. Thus, our 
data, in this large and ethnically homogenous group of patients, do not support 
the hypothesis that this genetic variant is strongly associated with diabetes, 
obesity, or dyslipidemia in patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
This genetic marker is therefore unlikely to serve as a clinically useful 
predictor of these disorders in Caucasian patients with diabetes mellitus.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1998.9962
PMID: 9918859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]