1. Genetics. 1999 Feb;151(2):447-58. doi: 10.1093/genetics/151.2.447.

An allele of RFA1 suppresses RAD52-dependent double-strand break repair in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Smith J(1), Rothstein R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University College of 
Physician and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032-2704, USA.

An allele of RFA1, the largest subunit of the single-stranded DNA-binding 
complex RP-A, was identified as a suppressor of decreased direct-repeat 
recombination in rad1 rad52 double mutants. In this study, we used two LEU2 
direct-repeat assays to investigate the mechanism by which the rfa1-D228Y allele 
increases recombination. We found that both intrachromatid and sister chromatid 
recombination are stimulated in rfa1-D228Y strains. In a rad1 rad52 background, 
however, the majority of the increased recombination is caused by stimulation of 
deletion events by an intrachromatid recombination mechanism that is likely to 
be single-strand annealing. Studies in which an HO endonuclease cut was 
introduced between the two leu2 copies indicate that the rfa1-D228Y mutation 
partially suppresses the rad52 defect in recovering recombination products. 
Furthermore, molecular analysis of processing and product formation kinetics 
reveals that, in a rad52 background, the rfa1-D228Y mutation results in 
increased levels of recombinant products and the disappearance of large 
single-stranded intermediates characteristic of rad52 strains. On the basis of 
these results, we propose that in the absence of wild-type Rad52, the 
interaction of RP-A with single-stranded DNA inhibits strand annealing, and that 
this inhibition is overcome by the rfa1-D228Y mutation.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/151.2.447
PMCID: PMC1460496
PMID: 9927442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]